Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for
ASCON
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen
Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
solane.elhirch@ru.nl,silvia.mella@ru.nl,alireza.mehrdad@ru.nl,joan@cs.ru.nl
Abstract. Ascon is a family of cryptographic primitives for authenticated encryption
and hashing introduced in 2015. It is selected as one of the ten ﬁnalists in the
NIST Lightweight Cryptography competition. Since its introduction,Ascon has
been extensively cryptanalyzed, and the results of these analyses can indicate the
good resistance of this family of cryptographic primitives against known attacks, like
diﬀerential and linear cryptanalysis.
Proving upper bounds for the diﬀerential probability of diﬀerential trails and for the
squared correlation of linear trails is a standard requirement to evaluate the security
of cryptographic primitives. It can be done analytically for some primitives like AES.
For other primitives, computer assistance is required to prove strong upper bounds for
diﬀerential and linear trails. Computer-aided tools can be classiﬁed into two categories:
tools based on general-purpose solvers and dedicated tools. General-purpose solvers
such as SAT and MILP are widely used to prove these bounds, however they seem to
have lower capabilities and thus yield less powerful bounds compared to dedicated
tools.
In this work, we present a dedicated tool for trail search inAscon. We arrange
2-round trails in a tree and traverse this tree in an eﬃcient way using a number of
new techniques we introduce. Then we extend these trails to more rounds, where we
also use the tree traversal technique to do it eﬃciently. This allows us to scan much
larger spaces of trails faster than the previous methods using general-purpose solvers.
As a result, we prove tight bounds for3-rounds linear trails, and for both diﬀerential
and linear trails, we improve the existing upper bounds for other number of rounds.
In particular, for the ﬁrst time, we prove bounds beyond2−128 for 6 rounds and
beyond 2−256 for 12 rounds of both diﬀerential and linear trails.
Keywords: Diﬀerential Trail Search· Linear Trail Search· Trail Weight Bounds·
ASCON
1 Introduction
Ascon is a family of cryptographic algorithms for authenticated encryption (AE) and
hashing [DEMS21a]. It is currently one of the ten ﬁnalists in the NIST lightweight
cryptography (LWC) competition for lightweight AE [TMC+21] and was selected in the
ﬁnal portfolio of the CAESAR competition [com14] as primary choice for lightweight
AE [DEMS16]. The AE schemes are based on the duplex construction [BDPV11a], while
the hashing functions are based on the sponge construction [BDPV07,BDPV08]. All family
members are based on theAscon permutation, which is also used inIsap [DEM+20],
another ﬁnalist in the NIST LWC competition.
The Ascon permutation has been extensively cryptanalyzed since its introduction,
giving conﬁdence on the security of the schemes based on it. However a thorough eﬀort
to prove bounds on the diﬀerential probability (DP) and squared correlation (C2) of its
2 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
trails was conducted only recently [GPT21,EME22,MR22]. Before that, only bounds
for 3-round trails were proved in [DEMS15] and for more rounds, the authors performed
heuristic searches showing smallDP and smallC2.
Proving bounds for trails is an important task in the evaluation of the security of a
permutation. The cost of a diﬀerential attack based on a given trail is inversely proportional
to itsDP. Similarly, the cost of a linear attack is inversely proportional to theC2. Therefore,
the smaller theDP or C2 is, the higher the cost of the attack is. Bounds on theDP or
C2 of trails are usually proven by bounding the number of active S-boxes of the trails
or its weight. Roughly speaking, the weightw of a diﬀerential trail relates to itsDP as
DP ≈2−w. Similarly, the weight of a linear trail relates to itsC2 as C2 ≈2−w. Therefore,
the higher the number of active S-boxes or the higher the weight is, the more costly the
attack is.
For some primitives, bounds can be proved analytically. An example is the AES with
its simple proof that a 4-round diﬀerential trail has weight at least 150 [DR20]. For other
primitives they are obtained by computer-aided proofs. In this case, a program scans the
space of allr-round trails satisfying a given requirement. The requirement is usually that
the number of active S-boxes in the trail is below a given threshold, or that the weight of
the trail is below a given threshold. Large state size and weak alignment contribute in
making the search space very large and thus the cost of scanning it very costly. It follows
that the bounds that one can prove are limited by the capability of the tool for scanning
such spaces.
Automated tools that are often used to prove bounds on the number of active S-boxes
are based on general-purpose solvers like Boolean satisﬁability (SAT) [MP13,EME22],
(mixed) integer linear programming ((M)ILP) [SHW+14,BPP+17,BJK+16,WH19] or
Satisﬁability Modulo Theories (SMT) [DEMS15]. Dedicated tools were used to prove
lower bounds on the weight of trails inNoekeon [DPAR00], Keccak-p [DV12,MDV17],
Xoodoo [DHVV18b], andSubterranean [MMGD22]. Such dedicated programs allow
to better exploit the structural properties of the primitive and usually allow to scan
larger spaces, leading to better results than tools based on general-purpose solvers. Before
2022, the best result obtained with tools based on general-purpose solvers that we are
aware of is the work of Mouha and Preneel, who used a SAT-based method to scan
the space of all 3-round characteristics up to weight 26 in the ARX primitive Salsa20,
which implies a weight per round below 9 [MP13]. The dedicated search for Noekeon
in [DPAR00] andKeccak-f[1600] in [DV12] both reached a weight per round of 12, while
the improvements of [MDV17] allowed to reach a weight per round of 15. The dedicated
search onSubterranean reached a weight per round beyond 14 [MMGD22]. In the last
months, better results have been achieved with both solvers-based tools and dedicated
tools. In [EME22] Erlacher et al. reached a weight per round of 17 with their SAT-based
method to scan the space of trails inAscon. While the most recent improvements to the
dedicated tool forXoodoo allowed to reach a weight of 21 per round [DMA22].
Inspired by the previous works on dedicated tools and their results compared to
automated tools based on general-purpose solvers, in this work we introduce a dedicated
tool forAscon. We present a number of techniques that deeply exploit the properties of
the linear and non-linear layer ofAscon to generate trails very eﬃciently. Such techniques
allow us to scan larger spaces of trails at a smaller computational cost compared to previous
work, that results in improved bounds. In particular, we reach a weight per round of 21.
Related work. Exact values for theDP and C2 of trails over 1 and 2 rounds ofAscon
can be derived by the fact that the S-box has maximumDP of 2−2 and maximumC2 of
2−2, and that the linear layer has branch numberB= 4. For more rounds, lower bounds
were proven in [DEMS15] and [EME22]. Both works are based on SAT solvers and prove
bounds on the number of active S-boxes. Directly bounding the probability would require
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 3
a more expensive model for the SAT solver compared to bounding the number of active
S-boxes, which already requires a major computational eﬀort.
In [DEMS15], Dobraunig et al. presented an SMT model and used it to prove that a
3-round diﬀerential trail has a minimum of 15 active S-boxes and a 3-round linear trail
has a minimum of 13 active S-boxes. These bounds automatically give bounds of2−30
and 2−26 for theDP and theC2 of 3-round trails, respectively. Bounds for more rounds
were proven later in [EME22], where Erlacher et al. presented a SAT model and used it to
prove bounds on the number of active S-boxes for 4 and 6 rounds, from which they derived
bounds for 8 and 12 rounds. In addition, by using these results and the bound on 1 round,
we can derive bounds for 5, 7, 9, 10, and 11 rounds. We summarize such bounds in the
second column of Table 1.
To overcome the computational limitation of SAT solvers, the authors of [EME22] aim
at reducing the search space as much as possible and split it in sub-spaces that can be
scanned in parallel. To this end, they introduced a number of techniques similar to those
usually used in dedicated tools, like starting from shorter trails with minimum number of
active S-boxes, building long trails from short trails in an incremental way, and taking
advantage of the translation symmetry of the primitive [DV12].
A signiﬁcant eﬀort has been also performed to ﬁnd trails with the highestDP or C2.
Such searches are based on heuristic tools and provide upper bounds. In [DEMS15], the
authors used a dedicated guess-and-determine tool (nldtool) to ﬁnd diﬀerential trails up
to 5 rounds, while a heuristic tool (lineartrails) to ﬁnd linear trails for 4 and 5 rounds
was introduced in [DEM15]. In [GPT21], the authors used constrained programming (CP)
to ﬁnd best diﬀerential trails for 5 and 6 rounds. The authors in [MR22] presented an
MILP-based approach that allowed them to ﬁnd a new 5-round linear trail with best
known C2 and proved tight bound for diﬀerential trails over3 rounds. We report the best
known trails found by these tools in the ﬁrst column of Table 1.
In dedicated tools, bounds on the weight of trails are derived, instead of evaluating
the number of active S-boxes. The ﬁrst dedicated tool for trail search was introduced
as early as 2000 forNoekeon [DPAR00]. It was later improved and reﬁned in [DV12]
and [MDV17] for Keccak-p and then adapted toXoodoo in [DHVV18b] and Sub-
terranean in [MMGD22]. In each of these works, the authors presented a number of
techniques speciﬁc for the permutation under analysis that deeply exploit the structure
of its linear and non-linear layers. However, the approach underlying these works is the
same and is generic, so it can in principle be applied to other ciphers. In a few words,
the goal of such approach is to reduce as much as possible the search space and deﬁne
methods to scan it eﬃciently. To this end, trails are split into classes where the weight
of trails in the same class can be easily bounded by generating only one representative
trail per class, calledtrail core. By exploiting the symmetry properties of the permutation,
trail cores can be further split into classes where each trail core in a class is the translated
version of another trail in the class and trail cores in the same class have the same weight.
Therefore, only one representative is generated, that is calledcanonical (or necklace to use
the terminology of [EME22]). Trail cores over multiple rounds are built by ﬁrst generating
the shortest possible trail cores, that are those over 2 rounds, and by extending them one
round at the time each time checking if the weight is below the expected limit. In [MDV17]
a generic method is introduced to generate such 2-round trail cores eﬃciently as a tree
search.
Our contribution. In this work we present a dedicated tool for trail search inAscon,
based on the tree-based approach introduced in [MDV17]. To obtain an eﬃcient instantia-
tion of the tree-based approach, we introduce a number of techniques that deeply exploit
the structure of the linear and non-linear layers inAscon. We also introduce methods
to eﬃciently extend trails over multiple rounds. We implemented such techniques in a
4 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
Table 1: Previous and new bounds for the diﬀerential probability (DP) of diﬀerential trails
and squared correlation (C2) of linear trails inAscon. R denotes the number of rounds;
min #S denotes the minimum number of active S-boxes.
(a) Diﬀerential trails
R best known probability previous lower bound new bound
DP method reference DP method reference DP
1 2−2 DDT 2−2 DDT
2 2−8 DDT+B 2−8 DDT+B
3 2−40 nldtool [DEMS15] 2−40 MILP [MR22]
4 2−107 nldtool [DEMS15] ≤2−72 SAT+min #S [EME22] ≤2−86
5 2−190 CP [DEMS15,GPT21] ≤2−74 combine 1R+4R ≤2−100
6 2−305 CP [GPT21] ≤2−108 SAT+min #S [EME22] ≤2−129
7 ≤2−110 combine 1R+6R ≤2−131
8 ≤2−144 SAT+min #S [EME22] ≤2−172
9 ≤2−146 combine 1R+8R ≤2−186
10 ≤2−180 combine 4R+6R ≤2−215
11 ≤2−182 combine 1R+10R ≤2−229
12 ≤2−216 SAT+min #S [EME22] ≤2−258
(b) Linear trails
R best known squared correlation previous lower bound new bound
C2 method reference C2 method reference C2
1 2−2 LAT 2−2 DDT
2 2−8 LAT+B 2−8 DDT+B
3 2−28 lineartrails [DEM15] ≤2−26 SMT+min #S [DEMS15] 2−28
4 2−98 lineartrails [DEM15] ≤2−72 SAT+min #S [EME22] ≤2−88
5 2−184 MILP [MR22] ≤2−74 combine 1R+4R ≤2−96
6 ≤2−108 SAT+min #S [EME22] ≤2−132
7 ≤2−110 combine 1R+6R ≤2−134
8 ≤2−144 SAT+min #S [EME22] ≤2−176
9 ≤2−146 combine 1R+8R ≤2−184
10 ≤2−180 combine 4R+6R ≤2−220
11 ≤2−182 combine 1R+10R ≤2−228
12 ≤2−216 SAT+min #S [EME22] ≤2−264
dedicated tool, calledAsconTrailTool, that we used to prove bounds for diﬀerential and
linear trails for diﬀerent number of rounds. Though a comparison of the computational
costs of our method and the method of [EME22] is not straightforward, due to the diﬀerent
machines employed in the two works, our techniques allowed us to scan a larger space at a
lower cost. The most direct consequence is that we can improve over known bounds. We
report our improved bounds in the third column of Table 1. Notably, for linear trails, we
prove tight bound for 3 rounds, closing the gap between the lower bound and the best
known trail. For 4 rounds, we can prove the bound of2−86 for diﬀerential trails in 13
CPU days, and of2−88 for linear trails in 110 CPU days. Our method is more eﬃcient in
comparison to the previous methods where the cost estimation for proving the bound of
2−80 is 6688 CPU days in [EME22] and 3898 CPU days in [MR22].
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 5
Given the aforementioned 4-round trails, proving bounds for 6 rounds required us 6
additional CPU days to prove the bound of2−129 for diﬀerential trails and 21 additional
CPU days to prove the bound of2−132 for linear trails. Our method performs better than
the one in [EME22] where the authors indicated that it required 2 additional CPU months
to prove the bound of2−108. For 12 rounds, we can prove for the ﬁrst time bounds beyond
2−256. We also prove better bounds for other numbers of rounds, which can be useful
information for designers when they have to choose the number of rounds to use in the
diﬀerent phases of a given construction.
Organization of the paper. In Section 2 we ﬁrst recall some concepts about trails and
trail cores, then we recall the strategy used in previous dedicated tools to prove trail
bounds and the generic tree-based method. Then, in Section 3 we present the speciﬁcation
of Ascon round function and propagation properties through it. In Section 4, we introduce
the tree-based method applied toAscon to generate 2-round trail cores and provide new
techniques to traverse the tree in a more eﬃcient way. After that, we explain how we
eﬃciently perform trail core extension using the techniques introduced in Section 5. Finally,
we present our practical results and improved bounds in Section 6 and in Section 7 we
provide some ﬁnal remarks.
2 Trails and trail search strategy
In this section we ﬁrst recall some concepts related to diﬀerential and linear cryptanalysis.
Then we explain the general strategy for performing trail search using the tree-based
approach.
2.1 Trails and trail cores
We start by deﬁning diﬀerential trails and trail cores over iterative cryptographic primitives.
Then, we do the same for linear trails and we introduce a uniﬁed notation for both cases.
2.1.1 Diﬀerentials and diﬀerential trails
Let x1 and x2 be two inputs to a transformationα overFn
2 , andy1 = α(x1) and y2 = α(x2)
be their corresponding outputs. We say b = x1 ⊕x2 is an input diﬀerence ofα and
a= y1 ⊕y2 is an output diﬀerence and we call the pair(b,a) a diﬀerential over α. The
diﬀerence probability (DP) of a diﬀerential(b,a) is deﬁned as
DP(b,a) = |{x∈Fn
2 |α(x−b) −α(x) = a}|
2n .
When DP(b,a) >0, we say thata is compatible with b through α. The restriction weight
of a diﬀerential, denoted bywr, is deﬁned as
wr(b,a) = −log2 DP(b,a) .
Let α be an iterative mapping, that consists of the repetition of a number of roundspi:
α = pr ◦···◦p2 ◦p1. A diﬀerential overpi is called around diﬀerential. An r-round
diﬀerential trailover α is a sequence ofr round diﬀerentials.
Let the round function be deﬁned as the composition of a linear layerpL and a non-
linear layerpS. We use a redundant representation of trails where we specify the diﬀerence
after each layer:
Q= a0 pL
− − →b0 pS
−→a1 pL
− − →b1 pS
−→a2 pL
− − →···
pS
−→ar .
6 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
The restriction weight of a trail is the sum of the weight of its round diﬀerentials:wr(Q) =∑r
i=1 wr(ai−1 pi
−→ai). Since pL is linear, the weight of a trail only depends on the weight
over the non-linear layers:wr(Q) = ∑r
i=1 wr(bi−1 pS
−→ai). If the non-linear layerpS has
algebraic degree2 (as inAscon), the weight of a diﬀerential overpS only depends on its
input diﬀerenceb[Dae95]. Hence, the weight of the trail is given bywr(Q) = ∑r
i=1 wr(bi−1).
Since the weight of anr-round trailQ is independent of the ﬁrst and last diﬀerences
of the trail, the sequence of diﬀerences(b0,a1,...,ar−1,br−1) – which isQ with the ﬁrst
and last diﬀerences removed – deﬁnes a set ofr-round trails with the same weightwr(Q).
On the other hand, for a givena1 there exist several diﬀerencesb0 that are compatible
with a1 through p−1
S . The minimum weight over all these compatible statesb0 is called
the minimum reverse weightof a1 and it is denoted bywrev(a1) [DV12]. It follows that
the sequence ˜Q= (a1,...,ar−1,br−1) deﬁnes a set ofr-round trails with weight at least
wrev(a1) + ∑r
i=2 wr(bi−1). ˜Q is calledr-round diﬀerential trail core[DV12].
2.1.2 Correlation and linear trails
Let α be a transformation overFn
2 . A linear approximation overα consists of a pair(a,b) of
selection vectors overFn
2 , calledinput maskand output mask, respectively. Thecorrelation
C of a linear approximation(a,b) is the correlation between the Boolean functionsaT ·x
and bT ·α(x):
C(a,b) = |{x∈Fn
2 |aTx+ bTα(x) = 0|
2n−1 −1 .
The correlation weightis denoted bywc(a,b) and is deﬁned as
wc(a,b) = −log2 C2(a,b) .
Similar to a diﬀerential trail, anr-round linear trailis deﬁned as a sequence of linear
masks. As in [BDPV11b,DHVV18b] we study linear propagation from the output to the
input. To this end, we rephase the round function so that the trail ﬁrst encounterspL and
then pS of each round (as in the diﬀerential case). Notice that such rephasing does not
aﬀect the trail analysis.
A linear trail is represented as
Q= a0 pL
T
−−→b0 p− 1
S
−−→a1 pL
T
−−→b1 p− 1
S
−−→a2 pL
T
−−→···
p− 1
S
−−→ar .
where a0 is the output mask (after the last round) andar is the input mask (before the
ﬁrst round). A maskai at the output ofpL maps to a maskbi = pLT(ai) before pL. If
the linear mappingpL is seen as the multiplication by a matrixM, thenpLT denotes the
linear mapping obtained by the multiplication byMT. To denote the propagation from
the output ofpS to its input, we usep−1
S .
The correlation weight of a linear trail is the sum of the correlation weights of the
round linear approximations composing the trail. Given thatpLT is linear and that, when
pS has algebraic degree 2, the correlation weight depends only on the value of the output
mask [Dae95], the weight of a linear trail is given bywc(Q) = ∑r
i=1 wc(bi−1)
Similar to the diﬀerential case, anr-round linear trail core[DHVV18b] is a sequence
˜Q= (a1,...,ar−1,br−1) that deﬁnes a set ofr-round linear trails with weight at least
wrev(a1) + ∑r
i=2 wr(bi−1).
2.1.3 Uniﬁed representation of trail cores
As done in [BDPV11b] withKeccak-pand in [DHVV18b] withXoodoo, we use a uniﬁed
representation of trails and trail cores. In fact, also in the case ofAscon, there are strong
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 7
similarities in the study of propagation of diﬀerential and linear trails. For diﬀerential
trails we consider the propagation of diﬀerences from input to output and for linear trails
we consider the propagation of masks from output to input. A trail core is speciﬁed by:
˜Q= a1 p∗
L
− − →b1 p∗
S
−→a2 p∗
L
− − →b2 p∗
S
−→a3 p∗
L
− − →···
p∗
S
−→br−1 .
where
• p∗
L = pL, andp∗
S = pS for diﬀerential trails, and
• p∗
L = pLT, andp∗
S = p−1
S for linear trails.
We refer to diﬀerences and masks asstate patterns, or onlystates or patterns, when we
generally talk about trails. A patternai represents a diﬀerence at the output ofpS in a
diﬀerential trail and a mask at the input ofpS in a linear trail. A patternbi represents
a diﬀerence at the input ofpS in a diﬀerential trail and a mask at the output ofpS in a
linear trail. We use the term weight, denoted byw, when we generically refer towr and
wc.
2.2 Strategy of the trail search
In our trail search, we aim to scan the space of allr-round trails with weight below a certain
threshold Tr, whereris usually a small number like 3,4, or 6. A naive way to generate them
would be to generate all 1-round trails (i.e. round diﬀerentials and linear approximations)
with weight below⌊Tr/r⌋and then extend them tor rounds. The value ofTr that can be
achieved is limited by the quantity of such 1-round trails, which grows exponentially with
the weight, and the cost of extending them. The number of 1-round trails can be reduced
when symmetry properties are taken into account. For instance, inXoodoo it can be
reduced roughly by a factor 128 thanks to the fact that both the linear and non-linear
layers are invariant with respect to translations parallel to the planes [DHVV18b]. While
in Keccak-f[1600] it can be reduced by a factor 64 thanks to the translation invariance
along the lanes [MDV17]. Even with such reductions, it is shown that this number still
grows exponentially with the weight [MDV17,DHVV18b].
However, as demonstrated in [MDV17,DHVV18b], the number of trails with a given
weight per round decreases with the number of rounds. That is, the number of 2-round
trails with weight below⌊2Tr/r⌋is smaller than the number of 1-round trails with weight
below ⌊Tr/r⌋. Therefore, a more convenient approach forKeccak-plike primitives consists
in starting from 2-round trails and extend them. This allows to achieve much higher values
of Tr for the same number of roundsr.
Actually, to prove bounds, it is not necessary to generate allr-round trails. We can
limit ourselves tor-round trail cores, since the weight of a trail core lower bounds the
weight of all trails in it. Therefore, we can start from2-round trail cores and extend them.
This strategy was used for Keccak [DV12,MDV17], Xoodoo [DHVV18b], and
Subterranean [MMGD22] and we will use it also in this work. In fact, also in the case
of Ascon, starting from 2-round trail cores instead of 1-round trails signiﬁcantly reduces
the number of patterns to extend. The symmetry properties ofAscon allows us to reduce
the number of 1-round trails and the number of 2-round trail cores with weight per round
(w/#r). In particular, the linear and non-linear layers ofAscon are invariant with respect
to translation along the horizontal axis and it allows to reduce them by a factor 64. In
Fig. 1, we depict these reduced numbers with weight per round(w/#r).
2.2.1 Generating 2-round trail cores as a tree search
A method to generate all 2-round trail cores with weight below a given thresholdT2
was introduced in [DPAR00], applied toKeccak-p in [DV12], and improved and reﬁned
8 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21
1
102
104
106
108
1010
1012
1014
1016
1018
1020
w/#r
# 1-round trails and
# 2-round trail cores
round diﬀerentials
2-round diﬀ. trail cores
linear approximations
2-round lin. trail cores
Figure 1: Number of 1-round trails and 2-round trail cores with weight per round(w/#r),
divided by 64.
in [MDV17]. Later, similar method was applied toXoodoo in [DHVV18b] and also
Subterranean in [MMGD22].
We now recall the main idea at the basis of the reﬁned method of [MDV17], which
consists in seeing all 2-round trail cores as nodes of a tree that is properly traversed to get
only those nodes with weight belowT2. In Section 4, we will explain how to instantiate it
for Ascon to perform an eﬃcient search.
A 2-round trail core is a pair(a,b) with weightwrev(a) + w(b). To build them we
have two choices: either we builda and then computeb = p∗
L(a) or we buildb and we
compute a = p∗− 1
L . Each node of the tree is encoded as an ordered list ofunits, called
unit-list. A unit is a set ofactive bits ata (if we are buildinga) or atb (if we are building
b), where a bit is called active if it equals one, otherwise it is calledpassive. For instance,
in Keccak-p and Xoodoo a type of unit is theorbital, which is a pair of active bits in
the same column ata [MDV17,DHVV18b], while inSubterranean a unit is a single
active bit ata [MMGD22].
The choice of building ﬁrsta or b, the deﬁnition of units and their order relation
inﬂuence the eﬃciency of the 2-round trail core generation. Therefore, it requires a
good understanding of the linear and non-linear layers of the round function and their
propagation properties.
Traversing the tree. The tree traversal is performed in a depth-ﬁrst fashion, where a
program iteratively calls the functionnext() (Algorithm 1) to generate the next valid
node, as in [MMGD22]. The traversal starts by callingnext() on an empty unit-list, and
ends when it results again in the empty unit list.
The functionnext() traverses the tree with three possible moves:toFirstChild(),
toSibling() and toParent(). If the node is an empty unit-list, then it adds the smallest
possible unit. The function toFirstChild() returns false if adding a new unit is not
possible. Otherwise it returns true. Thenadditional conditionsare checked to see if we can
prune the tree. If thetoFirstChild() function returns false or the additional conditions
are not satisﬁed, the routine will look for the next valid node in the tree by generating a
sibling for the current node using the functiontoSibling(). The functiontoSibling()
iterates the value of the last unit of the unit-list. If a sibling is found then the additional
conditions are checked. If there are no valid siblings, the algorithm calls the function
toParent() to remove the last unit from the unit-list and look for a valid sibling of the
parent node in a recursive way.
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 9
Algorithm 1next() function [MMGD22]
if (toFirstChild() == true)then
if (additional conditions are satisﬁed)then
return true;
do
while (toSibling() == true)do
if (additional conditions are satisﬁed)then
return true;
while (toParent() == true)
return false;
Pruning the tree. To eﬃciently traverse the tree, at each move we check whether the
node satisﬁes some additional conditions or not. To this end, we make use of two tools:
canonicity and score, whose deﬁnition fully depends on the speciﬁcation of the linear and
non-linear layers.
• Canonicity: Without considering round constant and key addition, the round
function of many cryptographic primitives exhibits translation symmetry. This
symmetry allows to divide the state space into equivalence classes where all patterns
in a class have the same properties and weight. Therefore, we aim to generate only
one pattern per equivalence class, that is calledcanonical.
• Score: The score of a node is deﬁned as a lower bound on the weight of a node and
all its descendants. This tool allows us to prune entire sub-trees as soon as we reach
a node whose score is higher thanT2. It should be tight enough to allow eﬃcient
pruning, but also eﬃciently computable.
2.2.2 Trail core extension
After generating all2-round trail cores with weight belowT2, we need to extend them to
generate trail cores over more rounds. Extension is done incrementally one round at the
time. Namely, we ﬁrst extend the 2-round trail cores by one round to generate 3-round
trail cores with weight below a givenT3. Then we extend the obtained 3-round trail cores
by one round to generate 4-round trail cores with weight below a givenT4 and so on.
Given anr-round trail core˜Q= (a1,b1,...,br−1), one can extend it to(r+ 1) rounds
in both forward and backward directions. In the term forward extension, forward means
through p∗
S, so throughpS for diﬀerential trails and throughp−1
S for linear trails. Backward
means throughp∗− 1
S , so throughp−1
S for diﬀerential trails and throughpS for linear trails.
In forward extension, we generate all patternsar that are compatible withbr−1 through
p∗
S, computebr = p∗
L(ar) and ﬁnally append(ar,br) to the end of˜Q. The weight of the
obtained cores isw( ˜Q) + w(br).
In backward extension, we generate all patternsb0 compatible witha1 through p∗− 1
S ,
then compute the correspondinga0 = p∗− 1
L (b0), and prepend them to˜Q. The weight of these
3-round trail cores is obtained by subtractingwrev(a1) and then addingwrev(a0) + w(b0).
By repeating the aforementioned process, one can extend a trail core over multiple
rounds in any direction.
3 The Ascon permutation
Ascon family includes the authenticated encryption schemesAscon-128 and Ascon-
128a [DEMS21b], the hash functionsAscon-Hash and Ascon-Hasha and the extendable
10 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
x0x1x2x3x4
⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕ ⊕
(a) Adding round constantpC.
x0x1x2x3x4
(b) Non-linear layerpS.
x0x1x2x3x4
(c) Linear layerpL.
Figure 2: Ascon’s round functionp.
output functions (XOF)Ascon-Xof and Ascon-Xofa. The AE schemes are based on
the duplex construction [BDPV11a], while the hashing and XOF functions are based on
the sponge construction [BDPV07,BDPV08]. All family members are based on theAscon
permutation, which is also used inIsap [DEM+20], another ﬁnalist of the NIST LWC
competition.
3.1 Ascon round speciﬁcation
The Ascon permutation operates on a state of320 bits arranged in ﬁve64-bit rows
x0,...,x4. The number of rounds is a tunable parameter. It is 12 in the initialization and
ﬁnalization phase of allAscon schemes, while it changes for the data processing phase.
It is 6 forAscon-128, 8 forAscon-128a, Ascon-Hasha, andAscon-Xofa, and 12 for
Ascon-Hash and Ascon-Xof.
The round function ofAscon is denoted bypand consists of three steps:p= pL◦pS◦pC.
The functionpC, that can be seen in Fig. 2a, adds a round constant to rowx2 of the state.
The non-linear layerpS applies 64 parallel 5-bit S-boxes, denotedS, to the columns of the
state, as in Fig. 2b. The non-linear part of the S-boxSis based on theχ shift-invariant
mapping [Dae95]. We denoteχ applied to ann-bit circle of bits asχn, so the S-box in
Keccak-p is χ5 [BDPV11b]. We hence can describeSas χ5 preceded and followed by
two linear mappings, each consisting of 3 bitwise additions. We depict it in Fig. 3.
Finally, pL applies a linear function to each row independently as in Fig. 2c and is
deﬁned as follows:
x0 ← x0 ⊕(x0 ≫19) ⊕(x0 ≫28)
x1 ← x1 ⊕(x1 ≫61) ⊕(x1 ≫39)
x2 ← x2 ⊕(x2 ≫ 1) ⊕(x2 ≫ 6)
x3 ← x3 ⊕(x3 ≫10) ⊕(x3 ≫17)
x4 ← x4 ⊕(x4 ≫ 7) ⊕(x4 ≫41)
(1)
Clearly, in pL there is no inter-row mixing and this is compensated by the linear
mappings inpS.
3.2 Propagation properties through the round
Since the S-boxSis based on theχ5 mapping also used inKeccak-p, it inherits some
interesting properties from it that were discussed in [Dae95] and that we summarize here.
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 11
x0
x1
x2
x3
x4
1
1
1
1
1
1
x0
x1
x2
x3
x4
Figure 3: Ascon’s S-boxS.
Diﬀerence propagation properties. Since pS has algebraic degree 2, given a diﬀerence
b at the input ofpS, the space of compatible diﬀerencesa at the output ofpS form a
linear aﬃne space A(b) with 2wr(b) elements [Dae95]. We can compute oﬀset and basis
for such space starting from oﬀset and basis overχ5, that are reported in [BDPV11b]. In
particular, for a given diﬀerenceb at the input ofS, we map it at the input ofχ5 through
the ﬁrst linear layer of bitwise additions, we take the oﬀset and basis that determine the
aﬃne space at the output ofχ5, and ﬁnally we map them through the second linear layer.
We provide oﬀset and basis vectors for all possible 31 non-zero diﬀerences at the input of
Sin Table 7. Among the 31 non-zero diﬀerences, 5 have weight 2, 15 have weight 3, and
11 have weight 4. Therefore, the weight ofbis at least twice the number of active columns
in b.
Diﬀerence propagating through the inverse ofpS is diﬀerent. For a given diﬀerencea
at the output ofpS, the set of compatible diﬀerencesb at the input ofpS is not an aﬃne
space, but we can exhaustively list them. The list of the diﬀerencesb compatible witha is
needed to computewrev(a) which is required for our trail search. Among the 31 non-zero
diﬀerences, 10 have 9 compatible diﬀerences, 10 have 10 compatible diﬀerences, 6 have 11
compatible diﬀerences, and 5 have 12 compatible diﬀerences. Moreover, 20 have minimum
reverse weight 2, and 11 have minimum reverse weight 3.
Mask propagation properties. For a given output maskb, the space of input maska
with a non-zero correlation withb is a linear aﬃne space with2wc(b) elements [Dae95].
Again, to build a representation of such space, we rely on the speciﬁcation of oﬀset and
basis overχ5 [BDPV11b]. We provide oﬀset and basis vectors for all possible 31 non-zero
masks at the output ofSin Table 8. Among the 31 non-zero masks, 10 have weight 2,
and 21 have weight 4.
Given a maska at the input ofpS, we can list the compatible masksb at the output
of pS, which do not form an aﬃne space. Among the 31 non-zero masks, 10 have 10
compatible masks, and 20 have 13 compatible masks, and 1 has 16 compatible masks.
Moreover, 30 have minimum reverse weight 2, and 1 has minimum reverse weight 4.
Notice that a linear trail has always even weight.
As explained in Section 2.1.2, the propagation of masks through the linear layerpL
is deterministic: an output maskb fully determines the corresponding input maska by
b= pLT(b). The transposepLT has the same shape aspL itself, the only diﬀerence is that
the right shifts become left shifts.
4 Generating 2-round trail cores in Ascon as tree-search
In this section, we explain how we generate all 2-round trail cores inAscon, with weight
below a given targetT2, using the tree-based approach of Section 2.2.1. To this end, we
ﬁrst deﬁne units and their order relation. Then we give a description of the techniques
12 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
a
pL
b
(a) Propagation froma to b
a
p−1L
b
(b) Propagation fromb to a
Figure 4: Propagation throughpL
used to traverse the tree and, to do it in an eﬃcient way, we deﬁne the score function and
discuss canonicity. After identifying the techniques used in the tree-search in Section 4.1,
we give a more detailed description on the two-level tree search in Section 4.2, and in
Section 4.3 we give a description of an alternative representation ofp∗
L.
4.1 Concepts and techniques
Active bits as units. For the tree-based approach we have to deﬁne units and their
ordering and the most important criteria for this choice are the ability to deﬁne an eﬃcient
score function and deal with canonicity eﬃciently. The linear mappingp∗
L does not have
a particular structure like the column parity mixers inXoodoo or Keccak-p, and the
obvious choice for units would be (coordinates of) active bits. We can choose to have the
units be active bits ina or inb. In other words, we either build the state ata and we
compute b= p∗
L(a), or we build the state atb and we computea= p∗− 1
L (b).
Active bits ina as units. If the units are deﬁned as active bits ina, adding a unit aﬀects
3 bits inb. If some of these bits are active in the parent, this addition cancels them. We
call the eﬀect of active bits in a parent that are not present in the childcancellation. The
inverse of the row mappingp∗
L is dense: it maps a row with a single active bit to a row
with many active bits. If the units are deﬁned as active bits inb, adding a unit aﬀects
many active bits ina, risking the cancellation of many more active bits. We illustrate this
asymmetry for the mappingpL on row 0 in Fig. 4. It works similarly forpLT. So with
units deﬁned ata an eﬃcient score is more likely to be easy as there is less opportunity
for cancellation. So we deﬁne our units as active bits ina. Note that cancellation only
takes place inb and an active bit ina will be present in all its children.
Score function based on number of active columns.The non-linear layerpS operates
in parallel on 5-bit columns. This is similar toXoodoo where the non-linear layer is the
parallel operation ofχ3 on 3-bit columns andKeccak-p, where it is the parallel operation
of χ5 on 5-bit rows.χ3 and χ5 are instantiations ofχ that has the property that adding
an active bit to an input diﬀerence does not decrease the weight, and that adding an active
bit at the output does not decrease the minimum reverse weight. This also holds for linear
masks. In pS this is not the case due to the presence of additional linear mappings in
the S-box. So, adding an active bit to a column ina may decrease its minimum reverse
weight and adding an active bit to a column inbmay decrease its weight. Still, each active
column ina contributes at least 2 to its minimum reverse weight and each active column
in b contributes at least 2 to its weight. Moreover, adding active bits to a column ina
or b cannot make it passive. So we can base the score function on the number of active
columns.
Row-index-ﬁrst lexicographic ordering. In a all the active columns can be accounted
for in the score, inb only those that cannot become passive due to cancellation when
adding units. This is where the ordering comes in. Units are deﬁned by their coordinates
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 13
(i,j) and there are two natural orderings, both lexicographic:i-ﬁrst orj-ﬁrst. In i-ﬁrst
the active bits in rowi = 0 come before those in row1 etc., inj-ﬁrst those in column
j = 0 come before those in column1, etc. Thei-ﬁrst ordering works well withp∗
L. This is
because this mapping is the parallel application of 5 linear mappings that operate on the
rows separately. In thei-ﬁrst ordering units are added row by row, where units are always
added in the row of the last unit or after it. Let us call thei-coordinate of the last uniti′.
Then rows ina with i<i ′will be the same for all descendants of a state. Asp∗
L operates
on rows separately, this will also be the case for the rows inb with i < i′. That means
that we can take as score function two times the number of active columns ina plus the
number of columns inb that are active in the rows withi<i ′.
Two-level tree: active rows and active bits.When we look at the children of a node
we see two kinds. Children where a unit is added to a row that already contains active
bits on the one hand and children where a unit is added to a row that does not on the
other. In the former case the last active row ofb cannot be taken into account for the
score and in the latter case it can. We address this distinction by deﬁning the units in a
two-level structure. At the top level the units are active rows, where an active row groups
all active bits in the same row. We will call the top level therow treeand its unit-lists
row-lists. This means that the children of a node in the row tree have the ﬁrst active rows
in common with their parent, but have one more active row. The consequence is that when
navigating in the row tree, for the score function we can count all active rows ata and at
b. We call this score function theScore-state() function. An active row is a unit list
too, where the units are active bits (within a speciﬁc row) listed in a so calledbit-list. The
consequence is that the children of a node in the row tree are also arranged according to a
tree, that we will call abit tree. More exactly, the children of a node in the row tree with
last active row ati′are 4 −i′bit trees. For example ifi′= 2, the children are grouped in
two bit trees: one that groups the states with last row at row indexi= 3 and one that
groups the ones with last row indexi= 4. The two-level tree search is detailed more in
Section 4.2.
Score in the bit tree: the case of index 2.Each bit tree contains264 −1 nodes so it
would be good to also prune these trees using a score function. Clearly, all active columns
of a and the active columns atb due to all active rows but the last can be counted in
this score. However, this does not help in states with a single active row and also not
when these rows have sparse bit-lists. We will now explain that we can also include active
bits from the last active row inb. Let us take a look at rowi = 2. Adding a unit at
position j aﬀects three bits inb, in positionsj, j−1 and j−6, so it aﬀects bits inb
only in the interval[j−6 mod 64,j]. Here we adopt the following convention for intervals
where we take into account the circular structure of the rows of the state:[x,y] with
y≥xis the set of indexes{x,x + 1,x + 2,...y}and [x,y] with y <xis the set of indexes
{x,x+ 1,...,63,0,1 ...y}. Assume we have an active row (bit-list) where thej-coordinate
of the last active bit isj′. The range ofj for the last active bit in its children is[j′+ 1,63],
so ifj′>5 the range of corresponding aﬀected bits inb is [j′−5 mod 64,63]. In other
words, any bit inbin the interval[0,j′−5] will be there for all children in the bit tree and
therefore the corresponding active columns can be counted in the score. This becomes
interesting as soon asj′>5.
Score in the bit tree: general case. The eﬃciency of this technique depends on the
(circular) distance between the aﬀected bits inb: the smaller the better. Inj = 2 this
distance is only6 but for the other rows, these distances are much larger. For example
for j = 0, the bit positions are0,19,28 and the shortest interval that encloses all three
is [0,28]. We will call the length of this interval thespan. For j = 1, the bit positions
14 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
c11000
wr = 4
11100
wr = 3
11010
wr = 4
11001
wr = 3
11110
wr = 4
11011
wr = 4
11111
wr = 3
Figure 5: The score of a column diﬀerence with the ﬁrst two stable bits set to(1,1) is 3.
0,39,61 can be enclosed in an interval of length25: [39,0]. We can address this problem by
adopting an alternative representation of the row that is used to compute the score in the
so calledScore-row() function. A more detailed explanation on the new representation is
given in Section 4.3.
Reﬁning the score ofb. Computing the score based on twice the number of active
columns inb is sub-optimal. In fact, while we are working on rowi, all active bits at rows
i′with i′< iare stable and thus we can consider their contribution to the weight. In
particular, for a given active column, only bits in rowsi′with i′≥ican be added and this
may potentially decrease the weight (though not below 2), but it may not. We deﬁne a
lower bound on the weight of each active column, that we callscore of the column, as the
minimum among the weight of the column and the weight of all possible columns that can
be obtained by adding bits ini′≥i. Then, the score of a state is the sum over the score
of all columns.
We illustrate an example in Fig. 5, with column diﬀerences and restriction weight. Let
the ﬁrst two bits of columncin Fig. 5 be set to(1,1). These bits are stable and we denote
them in black, while we denote in red the three bits that can become 1 later in the search.
On the right ofc we list the six possible column values that we can obtain by adding bits
to c in row 2, 3 or 4. The restriction weight of each column is reported below the column
and we can see that the minimum weight among them is3. So, we can deﬁne the score of
c to be3. If there are several active columns whose score is higher than 2, then the score
of b will grow more quickly and pruning comes earlier.
Pruning the tree using canonicity. Clearly, both pL and pS are shift-invariant with
respect to horizontal shifts (along thej-axis). A state that is thesmallest in its class of
states that are equivalent modulo horizontal shift is calledcanonical. The natural order
to determine which state is smallest is a lexicographical ordering on the row-list: state
X is smaller than stateY if the ﬁrst row in its row-list is smaller than the ﬁrst row in
the row-list ofY. If they have equal ﬁrst rows, we compare the 2nd row and so on. The
order of rows is similarly deﬁned using lexicographic ordering of their bit-lists, where we
compare j-coordinates of active bits starting from the ﬁrst one.
It was proven in [MDV17] that with such an order relation, the children of a non-
canonical node are not canonical. This implies that whenever a non-canonical node is
encountered, the full subtree can be pruned. For an active row we can deﬁne itsperiod:
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 15
x0is canonical with period 64
≫1
non-canonical state
x0is canonical with period 32
≫32
canonical state
Figure 6: The rowx0 in the left states is canonical with diﬀerent period. In the top ﬁgure,
since the period ofx0 equals the row length, translation results in a non-canonical state.
In the bottom ﬁgure since the period ofx0 is smaller than the row length, translation can
result in a canonical state.
it is the smallest oﬀset such that a shift of the row over that oﬀset leaves it invariant.
The period must be a divisor of 64 (the row length) and the vast majority of row values
has period 64. If the ﬁrst active row of a canonical state has period 64, all its children
are canonical. This means that in that case we do not have to check for canonicity in
subsequent active rows. Otherwise, we have to check canonicity by shifting any newly
added active row over all multiples of the period and comparing. Examples are given in
Fig. 6.
In general, only if the partial state consisting of the stable rows has period smaller
than the row length, these checks must be done when adding an active bit.
4.2 Two-level tree
We represent a 2-round trail core(a,b) by the positions of its active bits ina. An active
bit is determined by its coordinates(i,j) in the state withi the row coordinate andj the
column coordinate and0 ≤i< 5 and 0 ≤j <64.
The bit-list of an active row is of the following form
ai = [(i,j1),(i,j2),...,(i,jℓ)], (2)
with jk <jk+1∀k∈{1,...,ℓ−1}. We have thatai,jk = 1 if and only ifk∈{1,...,ℓ}.
At state-level, the row-list of a statea is a list of the form
a= [ai1 ,ai2 ,...,air− 1 ,air ] (3)
with is <is+1 ∀s∈{1,...,r −1}. We have thatai,j= 1 if and only if(i,j) ∈⋃
s ais. The
smallest value that an active rowai can assume is[(i,0)].
We use two sets of functions to walk through the tree. One is the set of functions that
operate on the bit-list of the last active row. The other is the set of functions that operate
on the row-list.
We start by describing the former, where we assume the bit-list of the last active row
is as in Eq. (2).
toFirstChildRow() If 1 + jℓ <64, it adds(i,1 + jℓ) to the bit-list and returns true. It
returns false otherwise.
toSiblingRow() If 1 + jℓ < 64, it iterates the last bit in the list, i.e.(i,jℓ) becomes
(i,1 + jℓ) and returns true. It returns false otherwise.
toParentRow() Itremovesthelastbitofthelist, resultingin ai = [(i,j1),(i,j2),...,(i,jℓ−1)].
If it leaves the bit-list empty, it returns false and true otherwise.
The following functions operate on the row-list, where the row-list of the current node
is as in Eq. (3).
16 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
toFirstChildState() If 1+ ir <5, it addsa1+ir = [(1+ ir,0)] to the row-list and returns
true. It returns false otherwise.
ToSiblingState() It callsnextRow() on the last active row and if that returns true, it
returns true. Otherwise, it checks whether the last active row is the bottom row,
i.e., ir = 4. If so, it returns false. If not, it moves the last active row one row index
down, i.e. ir = 1 + ir, and there takes the smallest active row valueair = [(ir,0)]
and returns true.
toParentState() It ﬁrst removes the last active row from the list, resulting ina =
[ai1 ,ai2 ,...,air− 1 ]. If this leaves the row-list empty it returns false and the search is
over. Otherwise, it returns true.
The complete search works as follows. The tree traversal starts by callingnextState()
on a state with a single active row set with a single active bit at position0 and ends when
nextState() returns false, that is when the row-list is empty. Its behavior is similar to
that of the functionnext(). To prune the row tree the procedure callsScore-state() on
the current canonical state.
The function nextRow() in Algorithm 3 is called byToSiblingState() to iterate
the last active row through a bit tree. It starts by checkingScore-row() and if it is
below the budget then it callstoFirstChildRow(). Here, a canonicity check is done on
the whole state to only return canonical states. If there is no valid child either because
Score-row() is above the budget or a canonical child has not been found, the procedure
will look for a sibling by calling the functiontoSiblingRow(). Here again, a canonicity
check is performed and if a canonical sibling has been found then the procedure returns
true, otherwise the functiontoParentRow() is called.
4.3 The alternative row representation
The active bits in a row are indexed byj, and we index them by an alternative coordinate
k that has a relation withj as k= j×qmod 64, withq odd. Then, the row component
function ofpL can be reformulated in terms of the new representation and this gives a
mapping that only diﬀers in the shift oﬀsets. For a good choice ofq we obtain a mapping
with minimum span that we callalternative representation. Minimizing the span requires
a speciﬁc factorq per row so, we have alternative representation for each row ofAscon.
For aj = a′
jq and bj = b′
jq, the alternative representation is deﬁned as follows:
pL : bj ← aj ⊕aj+s ⊕aj+t
b′
jq ← a′
jq ⊕a′
(j+s)q ⊕a′
(j+t)q
b′
jq ← a′
jq ⊕a′
jq+sq ⊕a′
jq+tq
p′
L : b′
k ← a′
k ⊕a′
k+sq ⊕a′
k+tq
Since the alternative representation has the minimum span, more active bits inb are
guaranteed to stay active after adding a unit. The active bits inb that remain active after
adding new units toaare calledstable bits. In the alternative representation, the bits inb
become stable sooner than in the original representation and more active columns can be
accounted inScore-row(). For instance,pL acts on the ﬁrst row asbj ← aj ⊕aj+19 ⊕aj+28.
After multiplying the shift oﬀsets by all odd numbers, we found thatq= 7 results in the
minimum span. So, the alternative representation of the linear diﬀusion layer for the ﬁrst
row is deﬁned asb′
k ← a′
k ⊕(a′
k ≫5) ⊕(a′
k ≫4). Fig. 7 provides a comparison between
the original and alternative representation ofpL over row0 where the number of stable
bits, that are depicted by blue cells, is higher in the case of alternative representation.
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 17
Algorithm 2Functions to navigate through a row tree
function nextState()
if (toFirstChildState() == true)then
if (Score-state() <T2) then
return true;
do
while (ToSiblingState() == true)do
if (Score-state() <T2) then
return true;
while (toParentState() == true)
return false;
end function
function toFirstChildState()
if (il = 4) then . Last active row index has reached the bottom row
return false;
a← a∪[(1 + il,0)]; . Set the last active row to the smallest active row value
return true
end function
function ToSiblingState()
if (nextRow() == true)then
return true;
if (il = 4) then
return false;
il ← 1 + il; . The last active row is moved one row index down
ail = [(il,0)] . Set the last active row to the smallest active row value
return true
end function
Algorithm 3Function to navigate through a bit tree
function nextRow()
if (Score-row() <T2) then
if ((toFirstChildRow()) && (is canonical) )then
return true;
do
while ((toSiblingRow()) && (is canonical) )do
return true;
while (toParentRow() == true)
return false;
end function
We denote byp′
L the alternative linear mapping ofpL for each row such that
pL = πq− 1 ◦p′
L ◦πq
where πq(j) = q×j mod 64. Fig. 8 illustrates howp′
L in the new representation works for
row 0. The list of parameters for the diﬀerent rows of the alternative representation of
pL with the minimum span are listed in Table 2. The alternative representation ofpLT
corresponds to the mapping obtained with−q.
18 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
a0
j
b0
j j−28
a′0
k
b′0
k k−5
Figure 7: The grey cells atb and b′represent the span in the original and alternative
representation of rowx0, respectively. The original representation (left ﬁgure) results in a
lower number of stable bits atb (blue cells) compared to its alternative representation on
the right.
63 ... 28 ... 19 ... 5 4 3 2 1 0a0
π7
63 ... 28 ... 19 ... 5 4 3 2 1 0a′0
⊕ p′L
63 ... 28 ... 19 ... 5 4 3 2 1 0b′0
π55
63 ... 28 ... 19 ... 5 4 3 2 1 0b0
Figure 8: The linear mappingpL for row0 can be seen as its alternative representationp′
L
surrounded by two multiplication layers, illustrated for bitb0.
5 Extension in Ascon
In this section, we explain how we perform trail core extension inAscon. We partially
rely on previous works onKeccak-p [DV12,MDV17] and Xoodoo [DHVV18b,DHP+20],
given that extension deals with the non-linear layer ofAscon pS which is based onχ5.
Given a trail core˜Q= (a1,...,br−1), we recall that forward extension by one round
consists in building all patternsar that are compatible withbr−1 over p∗
S and compute
br = p∗
L(ar). While backward extension consists in building all patternsb0 that are
compatible witha1 over p∗
S and computea0 = p∗− 1
L (b0).
The non-linear layer ofAscon can be seen as the parallel application of 64 5-bit S-boxes,
acting on each column independently. Therefore, we can treat extension at column level.
If b0 and a1 are compatible overp∗
S, then thej-th column ofb0 is compatible with the
j-th column ofa1 over S, for any column index0 ≤j <64. To build all statesb0 that
Table 2: List of parameters for the original and alternative representation of the linear
diﬀusion layer ofAscon.
original representation alternative representation
row oﬀset1 oﬀset2 span q oﬀset1 oﬀset2 span
0 19 28 28 7 4 5 5
1 61 39 25 41 5 63 6
2 1 6 6 1 1 6 6
3 10 17 17 19 3 62 5
4 7 41 30 47 7 9 9
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 19
are compatible witha1, we ﬁrst need to identify the active columns ina1, namely, the
non-zero columns. Then, for each active column, we build all compatible column values at
b0 through S. By combining them, we can ﬁnally build all compatible statesb0.
Similarly, we can build all compatible state patternsar given br−1.
5.1 Extension as a tree search
Extension can be performed as a tree search [MDV17,DHVV18b], where we incrementally
build b0 or ar. To this end we need to deﬁne units, their order relation, and a score function.
In this case we don’t have to deal with canonicity since canonical2-round trail cores yields
canonical r-round trail cores. A trail core is a sequence of state patterns. Translating each
pattern of the sequence by a ﬁxed oﬀset results in an equivalent trail core with the same
weight. We can deﬁne a canonical trail core as the smallest among its translated versions.
We can say that a core(a1,b1,...,br−1) is smaller than a core(¯a1,¯b1,...,¯br−1) if a1 is
smaller than¯a1, or ifa1 = ¯a1 and b1 is smaller than¯b1, etc. However, we can choose any
intermediate pattern in the sequence instead ofa1 to start the comparison. It is then
natural to start from the(r−1)-round trail core from which ther-round core is generated.
We say that anr-round trail core is canonical if the(r−1)-round trail core from which it
is generated is canonical. It follows that the generation of only canonical2-round trail
cores, yields to canonicalr-round trail cores naturally.
Diﬀerently from the tree search for the generation of2-round trail cores where a unit
was an active bit, here units are determined by the compatible column values. At each
move in the tree, we ﬁx the value of an active column of the state. To eﬃciently traverse
the tree we need a score function that lower bounds the weight of the(r+ 1)-round trail
cores obtained.
In forward extension this translates into lower boundingw(br) while we are building
ar. The addition of a unit atar can cancel some bits atbr because of the action ofp∗
L. To
deﬁne a good score function, we consider the stable bits atbr, that are active bits that
cannot be cancelled with the addition of any new unit. We represent stable bits by a
stability maskM, that is a state where a bit is 1 to indicate that the bit in that position
is stable and 0 otherwise. Thenbr ∧M gives the stable bits ofbr, and also the column of
br that will be active in all its descendants. We can deﬁne the score as twice the number
of active columns inbr ∧M.
In backward extension we have to lower boundwrev(a0) + w(b0) while we are building
b0. While the addition of a unit atb0 cannot turn active bits into passive, adding a
unit at b0 can potentially cancel many bits ata0, since the inverse ofp∗
L is dense. In
Keccak-p[DV12,MDV17], this problem was overcome by not considering the contribution
of a0 and by boundingwrev(a0) + w(b0) with a bound onw(b0) only. However, this is
sub-optimal. In this work, we use stability masks to determine the stable bits ofa0 and
thus consider also its contribution.
In general, the goal is to make the number of stable bits in the stability masks grow
as quickly as possible while traversing the tree, so that more columns are counted in the
score and pruning happens as early as possible. To this end, the order relation among the
units must be carefully deﬁned.
5.2 Forward Extension
For forward extension, we follow the approach used in [DHVV18b] forXoodoo, that is
the following. All patternsar that are compatible withbr−1 over p∗
S form an aﬃne space
A(br−1) with 2w(br− 1) elements. We represent such space through an oﬀset and a basis.
Each column atbr−1 deﬁnes an oﬀset and basis for the space of compatible columns over
S, according to Table 7 and Table 8. The state oﬀset, that we denote byo, is built by
gathering together all the column oﬀsets. It will be zero in all column positions that are
20 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
passive inbr−1. For each column vectoru speciﬁed by each active columnj, we build a
state vectorv that is all zero except columnj that has valueu. The basis hasw = w(br−1)
elements that we denote by{v1,v2,...,vw}. Therefore, A(br−1) = o + ⟨v1,v2,...,vw⟩.
Of course, brute-force scanning the whole aﬃne space becomes unaﬀordable when
w(br−1) is large. However, we only need to construct those statesar such that the weight
of br is below a given threshold. For this reason, it is practical to directly consider the
aﬃne space mapped throughp∗
L, namely before the nextp∗
S. We denote such space by
B(br−1) = p∗
L(A(br−1)) = o∗+ ⟨v∗
1,v∗
2,...,v∗
w⟩, witho∗= p∗
L(o) and v∗
k = p∗
L(vk).
We scan the spaceB(br−1) through a tree-based search as follows. The root of the
tree is the oﬀseto∗. The units are the indexes of the basis vectors, ordered by the natural
number ordering. A unit-listK= {k1,...,km}encodes the element of the aﬃne space
given byo∗+ v∗
k1 + ···+ v∗
km.The children ofKare all nodes of the formK∪km+1 with
km+1 ∈{km + 1,...,kw}.
We need to deﬁne stability masks so that the number of stable bits increases quickly
with k. A technique to do it consists in triangularizing the basisV∗= {v∗
1,v∗
2,...,v∗
w}. We
perform triangularization inAscon as follows. We start with an empty basisT. We loop
on all possible bit positions considering the lexicographic order relation on coordinates
(i,j). If a basis vector is found with an active bit in position(i,j), then such basis vector is
added toT and removed fromV∗. The same vector is also added to all remaining vectors
in V∗that have bit(i,j) active, to make it passive. After triangularization, we obtain
a new representation ofB(br−1) as o∗+ ⟨t1,t2,...,tw⟩. If the ﬁrst active bit intk is in
position (ik,jk), then, by construction, all bits in position(i,j) ≤(ik,jk) are passive in
all vectorstk+1,...,tw. We call(ik,jk) the pivot position of vectortk. For eachk, we
deﬁne the stability maskMk as a state that is 1 in the pivot position and in all positions
smaller than the pivot (i.e. in all(i,j) ≤(ik,jk)) and 0 otherwise. In addition we consider
the position of the stable bits in the oﬀset asO= ⋀w
i=1 ti. We add them to each stability
mask: Mk = Mk ∨O.
If the last unit in the list of a nodebr is k, then all bits inbr ∧Mk will be active
in all descendants ofbr. Therefore, all active columns ofbr ∧Mk will be active in all
descendants ofbr and each will contribute at least 2 to the weight. We deﬁne the score as
twice the number of active columns ofbr ∧Mk.
5.3 Backward Extension
Given a1, the patternsb0 that are compatible witha1 over p∗
S do not form an aﬃne space,
so we shall use a diﬀerent approach than the one for forward extension.
We present two methods to perform backward extension. In the ﬁrst one, presented
in Section 5.3.1, we follow the method used in [DV12] forKeccak-p, that builds on the
compatible column values, and we introduce some optimizations. Notice that [MDV17]
presents some optimizations for backward extension inKeccak-p, that exploit the structure
of the linear stepθ, which is a column parity mixer. Such techniques do not apply to
Ascon since its linear layer has a diﬀerent structure. In the second method, presented
in Section 5.3.2, we build an envelope space that contains the set of compatible patterns,
with the aim of growing the number of active columns ina0 more quickly. The former
method is more eﬀective when the number of active columns ina1 is small enough, say
less than 12. The second method is more eﬀective when there are many active columns in
a1. In our code we use both of them, considering the number of active columns at hand.
5.3.1 Extension using compatible patterns
For each active column positionj in a1, let Bj = {vj,1,...,vj,n(j)}denote the set of
compatible column patterns at the input ofp∗
S. The number of compatible patternsb0
is given by∏
j |Bj|. Since n(j) ranges between 9 and 12 for compatible diﬀerences and
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 21
is 10, 13 or 16 for compatible masks, the number of patternsb0 grows very quickly with
the number of active columns ina1 and it can be unaﬀordable to generate all of them.
However, we need to generate only those such thatwrev(a0) + w(b0) is smaller than a given
threshold T. We can do it using a tree-based approach where the nodes of the tree are the
patterns b0 and units and score function are deﬁned as follows.
The root of the tree is the fully passive state. The units are the indexes of the elements
of the setsBj ordered by the lexicographic order over(j,k). A unit-list can contain at
most one element per set of column patterns for a given indexj. At heighth in the tree,
all the ﬁrsth active columns are set. Only the leaves of the tree give compatible patterns.
The score function shall bound the quantitywrev(a0) + w(b0) for a node and all its
descendants. It is deﬁned asscorea + scoreb with scorea that boundswrev(a0) and scoreb
that boundsw(b0).
We start with the explanation ofscoreb that we compute as in [DV12,MDV17]. We
order the elements of eachBj by increasing weight so thatw(vj,k) ≤w(vj,k+1) for allk.
We denote bywj the minimum of such weights, that iswj = w(vj,1). For a node at height
h, the ﬁrsth active columns are set and their value cannot change by the addition of a
new unit. Each of the remaining active column will contribute to the weight by at least
wj. Therefore, for a nodeb0 we deﬁnescoreb(b0) = w(b0) + ∑
h<j wj.
ForKeccak-p[DV12,MDV17], scorea = 2 since a non-passive state has weight at least
2. This is sub-optimal because it does not take into account the contribution of the active
bits ata0. In this work, we deﬁnescorea based on the stable bits ofa0 in the following way.
We map each setBj before p∗
L obtaining Aj = {v∗
j,1,...,v∗
j,n(j)}, wherev∗
j,k= p∗− 1
L (vj,k).
At heighth, one element of eachAj with j ≤h has been added toa0 and any element of
Aj can potentially be added for allj >h. The OR of the elements that can still be added
gives the set of bits that can be potentially cancelled ata0. Its negation gives the stable
bits. Therefore, for eachh, we deﬁne the stability mask
Mh =
⋁
h<j
(⋁
k
v∗
j,k
)
=
⋀
h<j
(⋀
k
v∗
j,k
)
.
For a nodea0 at height h, all bits ofa0 ∧Mh will be active in all descendants ofa0.
Therefore, all active columns ofa0 ∧Mh will be active in all descendants ofa0 and each
will contribute at least 2 to the weight. We deﬁnescorea as twice the number of active
columns of the statea0 ∧Mh.
The ordering of the elements in eachBj by increasing weight implies that the right-
siblings of a node have weight (resp. score) greater than or equal to the weight (resp.
score) of that node. It follows that when a node is encountered whose score is greater than
the given threshold all its descendants and also all its siblings can be pruned.
As an additional optimization, we observe that during the backward extension of a
trail core ˜Qr = (a1,...,br−1), wrev(a1) is replaced byw(b0) which can be larger than
wrev(a1). Ifw( ˜Qr) <Tr for a givenTr, most of the times we wantw( ˜Qr)−wrev(a1)+w( b0)
to be still smaller than Tr. So, during the search we perform the additional check
scoreb <Tr −(w( ˜Qr) −wrev(a1)).
5.3.2 Extension using the envelope space
This method aims at prioritizing the growth of the number of active columns ina0, so
that wrev(a0) grows as quickly as possible.
First, we build a space that contains the set of compatible statesb0’s, that we call
envelope spaceand denote byE. To do this, for each active column ata1 we deﬁne the
envelope space of its compatible column patterns as0 + ⟨e0,e1,e2,e3,e4⟩, whereei ∈F5
2
has a single active bit in positioni. The envelope spaceEis the union of all these envelope
spaces and its dimension is ﬁve times the number of active columns ina1.
22 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
We scanEin a tree-based fashion as done in Section 5.2, where the root of the tree is
the oﬀset (in this case the all zero state) and we iteratively add basis vectors. Since the
envelope space is much larger than the actual space of compatible states, we must deﬁne a
score function that is very eﬃcient and allows to prune the tree as soon as possible. To
this end, we try to make the number of stable bits ina0 to grow as quickly as possible. A
way to do it is to consider the envelope space beforep∗
L and triangularize its basis.
Let E= ⟨v1,...,v5n⟩, wheren denotes the number of active columns ina1. Since p∗
L
is linear, we can transpose the envelope spaceEbefore p∗
L and getE∗= ⟨v∗
1,...,v∗
5n⟩with
v∗
k = p∗− 1
L (vk). We triangularize the basis ofE∗based on the lexicographic order relation
on coordinates(i,j) and we modify the representation ofEaccordingly. That is, when we
add a vectorv∗
k to a vectorv∗
ℓ in E∗, we addvk to vℓ in E. We obtain a new representation
of E∗as ⟨t∗
1,...,t∗
5n⟩. By construction, the triangularized basis contains ﬁrst all basis
vectors with active bits in row 0, then those with active bits in row 1, etc.
For eachk, we deﬁne the stability maskMk as a state that is 1 in all positions smaller
or equal than the pivot position oft∗
k, and 0 otherwise. We deﬁnescorea as twice the
number of active columns ofa0 ∧Mk. Finally, we deﬁnescoreb as twice the number of
active columns ina1. In fact, the number of active columns inb0 is the same ofa1 and
each contributes at least 2 to the weight. On the other hand, since we are scanning the
envelope space and not only the space of compatible states, we cannot use the weight of
b0, because in this case the addition of a new unit can potentially decrease it.
6 Practical results and improved bounds for Ascon
In this section, we report on our practical results. The improved bounds are reported in
Table1. Toscanthediﬀerentspacesoftrailcores, wefollowthediﬀerentstrategiespresented
in [DV12,MDV17,DHP+20,DMA22]. We used parts ofKeccakTools [DHVV13] and
XooTools [DHVV18a] for some routines for trail extension. All our tests are run on a
server equipped with an AMD EPYC 7552 48-Core Processor @2.20GHz. We exploited
the multicore architecture to run some of our tests in parallel, but execution times are
reported as single core costs in the following. We round up the execution time to the
closest integer.
In some cases, we compare our execution time to that reported in [EME22], which
uses machines equipped with Intel Xeon E5-2669 and E5-4669 v4 @2.20GHz. Even if the
machines are diﬀerent, and thus execution times are not perfectly comparable, we can
observe that our methods allow us to scan larger spaces than what was possible with the
solvers-based method of [EME22].
In the following, we denote byDT
r the space of allr-round diﬀerential trail cores with
weight < T, i.e. at most T −1. Similarly, we denote byLT
r the space of allr-round
diﬀerential trail cores with weight<T .
6.1 Results on 3 rounds: tight bound and all low-weight trails
Since the best known 3-round diﬀerential and linear trails have weight 40 [DEMS15] and
28 [DEM15] respectively, we scanned the spacesD41
3 and L30
3 to check whether they are
the lightest trails1. Our experimental results conﬁrmed the results for diﬀerential trails
in [EME22,MR22] and proved that28 is the tight bound for linear trails. In fact, we found
2 diﬀerential trail cores of weight 40, 1 linear trail core of weight 28, and no trail cores
with lower weight. The search took less than 3 minutes for diﬀerential trails and less than
4 seconds for linear trails.
1Notice that to prove that they are the lightest trails, it is suﬃcient to scan the spacesD40
3 and L28
3
and prove that they are empty. To check how many diﬀerential trail cores of weight40 and linear trail
cores of weight28 there exist, we chose to scan larger spaces.
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 23
Table 3: Details on the generation of canonical 3-round diﬀerential and linear trail cores
below target weight41 and 30, respectively.
search # cores time search details
space step # cores time
D41
3 2 3m
2wrev(a1) + w(b1) <40 284,561 2m
forward extension 2 4s
w(b1) + 2w(b2) ≤40 15,252 28s
backward extension 0 2s
L30
3 1 4s
2wrev(a1) + w(b1) <28 1,935 1s
forward extension 1 1s
w(b1) + 2w(b2) ≤28 972 1s
backward extension 0 1s
To scan the above spaces, we followed the approach used in [DHVV18b], which is the
following. A3-round trail core has weightwrev(a1) + w(b1) + w(b2). We split all trail cores
in D41
3 (resp. L30
3 ) into two sets based on whetherwrev(a1) <w(b2) or wrev(a1) ≥w(b2).
• The former case implies that2wrev(a1) + w(b1) <40 (resp. <28). Such trail cores
can be obtained by generating all2-round trail cores(a1,b1) satisfying this inequality
and extending them in the forward direction by one round up to 40 (resp. 28).
• The latter case implies thatw(b1) + 2w(b2) ≤40 (resp. ≤28). Such trails can be
obtained by generating all2-round trail cores(a2,b2) satisfying this inequality and
then extending them in the backward direction by one round up to 40 (resp. 28).
Detailed execution times are given in Table 3 together with the number of trail cores found
in each step of the search.
Beyond proving bounds for 3-round trails, we are also interested in the distribution of
low-weight 3-round trails inAscon. To this end, we also scanned the spaceD51
3 (resp.
L52
3 ), and counted all 3-round trails contained in such cores with weight below51 (resp.
52). To count trails, we used the code for backward extension to build all patternsb0
compatible witha1 that satisfyw(b0) + w(b1) + w(b2) < 51 (resp. < 52) and we count
each of themw(b2) times. Results are depicted in Fig. 9. We can notice that, per given
(even) weight≥40, the ratio between the number of linear trails and diﬀerential trails
ranges between 9.7 (for weight 46) and 66.5 (for weight 44). This is due to the fact that
the LAT of theAscon S-box is more dense than its DDT.
6.2 Results on 4 rounds: improved (non-tight) bounds
The best known 4-round diﬀerential and linear trails inAscon have weight107 and
98 respectively [DEMS15,DEM15], while the previously proved lower bound is72 for
both [EME22].
With our techniques, we scanned the spacesD86
4 and L88
4 . We found that both spaces
are empty, which implies that any4-round diﬀerential trail has weight at least86 and any
4-round linear trail has weight at least88. This improves over known results, even if the
new bounds are still not tight.
Our search took around 13 days for diﬀerential trails and around 110 days for linear
trails. While in [EME22] the authors report a cost of 600 days each for diﬀerential and
linear trails to prove a bound of72. Moreover, the authors in [EME22] estimate a cost of
24 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50
101
106
1011
1016
8.59 ·109
3.44 ·1010
3.44 ·1010
1.34 ·108
7.82 ·1010
7.43 ·1011
3.16 ·1012
6.99 ·1012
9.66 ·1012
1.92 ·1013
5.82 ·1013
1.05 ·106
1.26 ·107
3.36 ·107
6.71 ·108
4.83 ·109
2.58 ·1010
1.93 ·1011
9.71 ·1011
5.2 ·1012
3.08 ·1013
1.08 ·1014
7.3 ·1014
weight
# trail cores
diﬀerential
linear
Figure 9: Number of all canonical 3-round trails per weight.
8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42
101
104
107
1010
2
3
8
3
11
172
10
52
449
1,147
314
1,058
3,747
13,057
4,855
14,141
53,096
1.09 ·105
76,763
2 ·105
5.28 ·105
1.07 ·106
1.02 ·106
2.41 ·106
5.81 ·106
1.02 ·107
1.3 ·107
2.86 ·107
5.99 ·107
1.03 ·108
1.56 ·108
3.22 ·108
5
22
23
861
348
7,271
10,288
1.24 ·105
1.63 ·105
1.37 ·106
2.83 ·106
1.8 ·107
4.18 ·107
2.17 ·108
6.04 ·108
2.71 ·109
8.27 ·109
weight
# trail cores
diﬀerential
linear
Figure 10: Number of all canonical 2-round trail cores per weight.
6688 days to prove a bound of80 whereas in [MR22], they estimate 3898 days to prove
this bound. Therefore, with our method we could reach higher bounds with signiﬁcantly
less computational cost.
To scan the above spaces, we followed [DHVV18b]. Any 4-round diﬀerential (resp.
linear) trail core with weightwrev(a1) + w(b1) + w(b2) + w(b3) < 86 (resp. < 88) has
wrev(a1) + w(b1) <43 (resp. <44) orw(b2) + w(b3) <43 (resp. <44). Otherwise, their
sum would be at least86 (resp. 88). We could thus generate all trail cores inD86
4 (resp.
L88
4 ) by generating all 2-round trail cores inD43
2 (resp. L44
2 ) and extending them to 4
rounds below 86 (resp. 88). To perform extension to 4 rounds, we ﬁrst extended to 3
rounds below84 (resp. 86), since we know that the remaining round has weight at least 2.
Details on the number of trail cores found in each step of the search and the execution
times are reported in Table 4. In Fig. 10, we report the number of all 2-round trail cores
per given weight. Again, we can observe that (for even weights) the number of 2-round
linear trail cores found is signiﬁcantly higher than the number of 2-round diﬀerential trail
cores. This diﬀerence of course reﬂects on the costs for extension.
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 25
Table 4: Details on the generation of canonical 4-round diﬀerential and linear trail cores
with weight lower than86 and 88, respectively. Timings are rounded to the closest integer.
search # cores time search details
space step # cores time
D86
4 0 310h
generation ofD43
2 704,744,005 100h
forw.ext. to 3 rounds withw <84 2,421,335 140h
forw.ext. to 4 rounds withw <86 0 1m
back.ext. to 3 rounds withw <84 2,424 66h
back.ext. to 4 rounds withw <86 0 3h
L88
4 0 2641h
generation ofL44
2 11,866,934,404 397h
forw.ext. to 3 rounds withw <86 44,850,380 1411h
forw.ext. to 4 rounds withw <88 0 25m
back.ext. to 3 rounds withw <86 40,013 671h
back.ext. to 4 rounds withw <88 0 161h
6.3 Results on 5 rounds: new (non-tight) bounds
The best known diﬀerential trail over 5 rounds has weight 190 [DEMS15,GPT21], while
the best known linear trail has weight 184 [MR22]. As far as we know, there are no proved
lower bounds for 5-round trails, before this work. We can prove non-tight bounds of100
for diﬀerential trails and96 for linear trails. To this end, we scanned the spacesD100
5 and
L96
5 , which resulted to be both empty. Our search took around 158 days for diﬀerential
trails and around 127 days for linear trails.
To perform our search, we followed the approach of [DHP+20], to re-use the 2-round trail
cores already built. We split the spaceD100
5 (resp. L96
5 ) into two sets. The ﬁrst contains
all 5-round trail cores withwrev(a1) + w(b1) <43 (resp. <44). To cover it, we extend all
2-round trail cores inD43
2 (resp. L44
2 ), that we already have, by 3 rounds in the forward
direction below weight100 (resp. 96). The second set contains all 5-round trail cores with
wrev(a1) + w(b1) ≥43 (resp. ≥44). This implies thatw(b2) + w(b3) + w(b4) <57 (resp.
<52). Therefore, we generated all 3-round trail cores inD57
3 (resp. L52
3 ) and extended
them backwards below weight100 (resp. 96).
Details on the diﬀerent steps of our search are reported in Table 5. As we didn’t need
to regenerate the 2-round trail cores inD43
2 and L44
2 (because we already generated them
for the search over 4 rounds), we report the corresponding time between parentheses and
we don’t consider it in the total cost of this search.
6.4 Results on 6 rounds: improved bounds beyond2−128
The previously proved lower bound on the weight of 6-round trails is 108, for both linear
and diﬀerential trails [EME22]. With our techniques we can prove that the spacesD129
6
and D132
6 are both empty. It follows that any6-round diﬀerential trail has weight at least
129 and any6-round linear trail has weight at least132. Even if our new bounds are
still not tight, we are able to prove for the ﬁrst time that 6-round trails inAscon have
diﬀerential probability or squared correlation lower than2−128.
Our search took around 6 days for diﬀerential trails and around 21 days for linear trails.
While in [EME22], the authors report a cost of 2 months each for diﬀerential and linear
trails. Both in this work and in [EME22], results for 6 rounds are built on top of results on
3 and 4 rounds, whose cost is not included in the ﬁgures for 6 rounds. Even if we include
26 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
Table 5: Results on the generation of canonical 5-round diﬀerential and linear trail cores
with weight lower than100 and 96, respectively. Timings between parentheses mean that
we can reuse previous results and they are not counted in the total amount of time.
search # cores time search details
space step # cores time
D100
5 0 3795h
generation ofD43
2 704,744,005 (100h)
forw.ext. by 3 rounds withw <100 0 3683h
generation ofD57
3 437 112h
back.ext. by 2 rounds withw <100 0 3s
L96
5 0 3045h
generation ofL44
2 11,866,934,404 (397h)
forw.ext. by 3 rounds withw <96 3037h
generation ofL52
3 309 8h
back.ext. by 2 rounds withw <96 0 1s
such costs in the total computational cost for 6 rounds, our technique still requires less
time compared to [EME22] to reach better bounds.
To scan the spaceD129
6 (resp. L132
6 ), we followed the approach of [DMA22]. First, we
split the space in two subspaces that we denoteS1 and S2. The setS1 contains all 6-round
trail cores withwrev(a1) + w(b1) + w(b2) <57 (resp. <52) orw(b3) + w(b4) + w(b5) <57
(resp. <52). The spaceS2 is the complement ofS1, that is the space of all 6-round trail
cores withwrev(a1) + w(b1) + w(b2) ≥57 (resp. ≥52) andw(b3) + w(b4) + w(b5) ≥57
(resp. ≥52).
The details of our search are summarized here.
Scanning S1 starting fromD57
3 (resp. L52
3 ). The spaceS1 can be scanned by extending
all 3-round trail cores inD57
3 (resp. L52
3 ) by 3 rounds below weight129 (resp. 132). We
ﬁrst extended all 3-round trails in the space by 3 rounds in the forward direction and then
by 3 rounds in the backward direction. To extend to 6 rounds, we ﬁrst extended to 4
rounds below121 (resp. 122) because we know that the two remaining rounds will weight
at least 8. Then we extended to 5 rounds below127 (resp. 130) because we know that the
remaining round will weigh at least 2. For both diﬀerential and linear case, extension to
5 rounds resulted in an empty set. Therefore, we didn’t need to perform extension to 6
rounds.
Scanning S2 starting fromD43
2 (resp. L44
2 ). The spaceS2 is further split into three
subsets. In fact, any 6-round trail core with weight below129 (resp. 132) can be generated
by starting from a 2-round trail core of weight below43 (resp. 44) placed at the beginning,
or in the middle, or at the end of the trail. In the ﬁrst case, the 2-round trail core is
extended by four rounds in the forward direction. In the second case, it is extended by
two rounds in the forward direction and two rounds in the backward direction. In the last
case, it is extended by four rounds in the backward direction.
• Starting from the beginning. To extend 2-round trail cores to 6 rounds, we
performed extension by one round at the time each time limiting the weight up to
which we perform extension, considering the minimum contribution of the remaining
rounds.
First, we extended 2-round trail cores to 3 rounds below129 −57 = 72 (resp.
132 −52 = 80) because we are in the case wherew(b3) + w(b4) + w(b5) ≥57 (resp.
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 27
Table 6: Results on the generation of canonical 6-round diﬀerential and linear trail cores
with weight lower than129 and 132, respectively. Timings between parentheses mean that
we can reuse previous results and they are not counted in the total amount of time. -
means that the step was not performed, because we know it leads to an empty space.
search # cores time search details
space step # cores time
D129
6 0 135h
generation ofD57
3 437 112h
forw.ext. by 3 rounds withw <129 0 9h
backw.ext. by 3 rounds withw <129 0 11h
generation ofD43
2 704,744,005 (100h)
D43
2 at the beginning
- f.e. to 3 rounds with57 ≤w <72 43,465 (140h)
- f.e. to 4 rounds withw <121 0 3h
D44
2 in the middle 0 -
D44
2 at the end 0 -
L132
6 0 493h
generation ofL52
3 309 (8h)
forw.ext. by 3 rounds withw <132 0 7h
backw.ext. by 3 rounds withw <132 0 450h
generation ofL44
2 11,866,934,404 (397h)
L44
2 at the beginning
- f.e. to 3 rounds with52 ≤w <80 5,171,116 (1411h)
- f.e. to 4 rounds withw <124 14,082 36h
- f.e. to 5 rounds withw <130 0 1s
L44
2 in the middle 0 -
L44
2 at the end 0 -
≥ 52). Among the obtained 3-round trail cores, we kept only those satisfying
wrev(a1) + w(b1) + w(b2) ≥57 (resp. ≥52) because otherwise they belong toS1.
Notice that the set of such trail cores is a subset of the set obtained during the search
over 4 rounds. In that case in fact, we extended all trail cores inD43
2 (resp. L44
2 )
to 3 rounds below weight 84 (resp. 86). Therefore, we did not need to perform this
step but we just extracted the needed trail cores from such set.
Then, we extended the obtained 3-round trail cores to 4 rounds below129 −8 = 121
(resp. 132 −8 = 124) because we know thatw(b4) + w(b5) ≥8, since any 2-round
trail has weight at least 8.
The obtained4-round trail cores were then extended to 5 rounds below129 −2 = 127
(resp. 132 −2 = 130) because we know thatw(b5) ≥2.
Finally, we extended the obtained 5-round trail cores to 6 rounds below129 (resp.
132).
Notice that, for diﬀerential trails, extension to 4 rounds already resulted in an empty
set. Therefore, extension to 5 and 6 rounds was not performed. For linear trails, it
is extension to 5 rounds that gave an empty set. Therefore, we could skip extension
to 6 rounds.
• Starting from the middle.We can assume thatwrev(a1) + w(b1) ≥43 (resp.
28 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
≥44) because the other case is covered in the previous step. First, we need to
perform forward extension to 4 rounds below129 −43 = 86 (resp. 132 −44 = 88)
because wrev(a1) + w(b1) ≥43 (resp. ≥44). Notice that we already performed this
search in Section 6.2. In fact, this was part of the search to buildD86
4 (resp. L88
4 ),
which is empty. Therefore, we did not need to perform this step of the search.
• Starting from the end.We can assume thatwrev(a1) + w(b1) ≥43 (resp. ≥44)
and w(b2) + w(b3) ≥43 (resp. ≥44), because the opposite is already covered in the
two previous steps. First, we need to perform backward extension to 4 rounds below
129 −43 = 86 (resp. 132 −44 = 88) becausewrev(a1) + w(b1) ≥43 (resp. ≥44).
Again, we already performed this search in Section 6.2 to buildD86
4 (resp. L88
4 ). As
we already know that this leads to an empty set, we can jump this step of the search.
Figures on the number of trail cores found in each step of the search and details on the
execution time of each step are given in Table 6. When we can reuse trail cores generated
in previous searches, we put the corresponding computational time between parentheses
and we don’t include it in the total cost. When a step is not performed because we know
that it leads to an empty space, we put a dash.
6.5 Results on 8 rounds: improved (non-tight) bounds
Since D86
4 and L88
4 are empty, we can claim that alsoD172
8 and L176
8 are empty. In fact, if
we split any 8-round diﬀerential (resp. linear) trail with weight<172 (resp. <176) in
two 4-round trails, at least one of the two must have weight<86 (resp. <88). Otherwise,
their sum would be≥172 (resp. ≥176). Therefore, all 8-round diﬀerential (resp. linear)
trails with weight below172 (resp. 176) can be obtained by the extension of all 4-round
trails with weight below86 (resp. 88). But, we know that such 4-round trails do not exist.
Therefore, also such 8-round trails do not exist. It follows that172 is a lower bound on
the weight of any8-round diﬀerential trail and176 is a lower bound on the weight of any
8-round linear trail. Such bounds improve over previous known bound, which was 144 for
both diﬀerential and linear trails. However, they are still non-tight.
6.6 Results on 12 rounds: improved bounds beyond2−256
With a reasoning similar to the one used for 8 rounds, we can prove that the spacesD258
12
and L264
12 are empty, given that the spacesD129
6 and L132
6 are empty. It follows that any
12-round diﬀerential trail has weight at least258 and any12-round linear trail has weight
at least264. Such bounds improve over previous known bound, which was216 for both
diﬀerential and linear trails. Even if our new bounds are still non-tight, they allow us
to prove for the ﬁrst time that 12-round trails inAscon have diﬀerential probability or
squared correlation lower than2−256.
6.7 Results on 7, 9, 10, and 11 rounds: improved (non-tight) bounds
Based on the results obtained for 4, 5, and 6 rounds, we can derive bounds on 7, 9, 10,
and 11 rounds. We explain how to do it for 10 rounds by combining the results for 4 and
6 rounds. Then we show how to obtain bounds for the other numbers of rounds similarly.
We can cover the spaceD215
10 (resp. L220
10 ) in the following way. We split the set in two
subsets. The ﬁrst contains all 10-round trail cores withwrev(a1)+w(b1)+w(b2)+w(b3) <86
(resp. 88), while the second set is its complement. We can cover the ﬁrst set by extending all
4-round trail cores inD86
4 (resp. L88
4 ) by 6 rounds in the forward direction below215 (resp.
220). The second set contains all 10-round trails withwrev(a1)+w( b1)+w( b2)+w( b3) ≥86
(resp. 88), which implies that the other 6 rounds have weight below129 (resp. 132).
Therefore, we can cover it by extending all 6-round trail cores inD129
6 (resp. L132
6 ) by 4
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 29
rounds in the backward direction below215 (resp. 220). Since bothD86
4 and D129
6 (resp.
L88
4 and L132
6 ) are empty, then alsoD215
10 (resp. L220
10 ) is empty. Therefore,215 and 220
are lower bounds on the weight of 10-round diﬀerential and linear trails, respectively.
For the other numbers of rounds, we consider the combination that yields the best
bounds. For 7 rounds, we can prove a bound of131 for diﬀerential trails and134 for linear
trails, considering the results on 6 rounds and that 1 round weights at least 2. For 9 rounds,
we combine the results for 4 and 5 rounds and obtain a bound of186 for diﬀerential trails
and 184 for linear trails. Finally, for 11 rounds we obtain a bound of229 for diﬀerential
trails and228 for linear trails, by combining the results for5 and 6 rounds.
For the sake of comparison, we can apply the same reasoning to the results presented
in [EME22]. We can derive bounds for r rounds from the bounds on r −1 rounds,
considering that one round has minimum weight 2. For diﬀerential and linear trails, this
gives a bound of74 for 5 rounds, of110 for 7 rounds, of146 for 9 rounds, and182 for 11
rounds.
7 Conclusions
In this work, we presented a dedicated tool for trail search inAscon, based on the 2-round
trail core generation methods given in [MDV17] and improved methods for extension based
on the works done in [DV12,DHVV18b]. Using these techniques, we proved tight bound
for 3-rounds linear trails and improved the existing bounds for other number of rounds.
In particular, we prove for the ﬁrst time bounds beyond2−128 for 6 rounds, and for12
rounds bounds beyond2−256. Our approach improves and proves bounds in a reasonable
amount of time and it conﬁrms that dedicated tools can still outperform methods based
on general-purpose solvers.
As a takeaway from this and previous works on Keccak-p [MDV17], Xoodoo
[DHVV18b], andSubterranean [MMGD22] we highlight that:
• For the 2-round trail search stage, the linear layers ofAscon and Subterranean
allow a simpler deﬁnition of units compared toKeccak-p and Xoodoo where a
more complex linear layer is used.
• A non-linear layer based on the parallel application of small S-boxes (as inKeccak-p,
Xoodoo and Ascon) implies a simpler analysis of the propagation properties
compared to the non-linear layer ofSubterranean. In the latter case, the backward
extension is more complex, and the deﬁnition of the minimum reverse weight requires
a thorough proof which makes it more complicated.
Acknowledgements
Solane El Hirch and Silvia Mella are supported by the Cryptography Research Center of
the Technology Innovation Institute (TII), Abu Dhabi (UAE), under the TII-Radboud
project with titleEvaluation and Implementation of Lightweight Cryptographic Primitives
and Protocols.
Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen are supported by the European Research Council under
the ERC advanced grant agreement under grant ERC-2017-ADG Nr. 788980 ESCADA.
References
[BDPV07] Guido Bertoni, Joan Daemen, Michael Peeters, and Gilles Van Assche. Sponge
functions. https://keccak.team/files/SpongeFunctions.pdf, 2007.
30 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
[BDPV08] Guido Bertoni, Joan Daemen, Michaël Peeters, and Gilles Van Assche. On
the indiﬀerentiability of the sponge construction. In Nigel P. Smart, editor,
Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2008, 27th Annual International
Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques,
Istanbul, Turkey, April 13-17, 2008. Proceedings, volume 4965 ofLecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 181–197. Springer, 2008.
[BDPV11a] Guido Bertoni, Joan Daemen, Michaël Peeters, and Gilles Van Assche. Duplex-
ing the sponge: Single-pass authenticated encryption and other applications.
In Ali Miri and Serge Vaudenay, editors,Selected Areas in Cryptography -
18th International Workshop, SAC 2011, Toronto, ON, Canada, August 11-12,
2011, Revised Selected Papers, volume 7118 ofLecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 320–337. Springer, 2011.
[BDPV11b] Guido Bertoni, Joan Daemen, Michael Peeters, and Gilles Van Assche. The
keccak reference, January 2011.
[BJK+16] Christof Beierle, Jérémy Jean, Stefan Kölbl, Gregor Leander, Amir Moradi,
Thomas Peyrin, Yu Sasaki, Pascal Sasdrich, and Siang Meng Sim. The
SKINNY Family of Block Ciphers and Its Low-Latency Variant MANTIS.
In Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2016, volume 9815 ofLNCS, pages
123–153. Springer, 2016.
[BPP+17] Subhadeep Banik, Sumit Kumar Pandey, Thomas Peyrin, Yu Sasaki,
Siang Meng Sim, and Yosuke Todo. GIFT: A Small Present - Towards
Reaching the Limit of Lightweight Encryption. InCryptographic Hardware
and Embedded Systems - CHES 2017, volume 10529 ofLNCS, pages 321–345.
Springer, 2017.
[com14] CAESAR committee. CAESAR: Competition for authenticated encryption:
Security, applicability, and robustness, 2014.
[Dae95] Joan Daemen. Cipher and hash function design, strategies based on linear
and diﬀerential cryptanalysis, PhD Thesis. PhD thesis, K.U.Leuven, 1995.
[DEM15] Christoph Dobraunig, Maria Eichlseder, and Florian Mendel. Heuristic tool for
linear cryptanalysis with applications to CAESAR candidates. In Tetsu Iwata
and Jung Hee Cheon, editors,Advances in Cryptology - ASIACRYPT 2015 -
21st International Conference on the Theory and Application of Cryptology
and Information Security, Auckland, New Zealand, November 29 - December
3, 2015, Proceedings, Part II, volume 9453 ofLecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 490–509. Springer, 2015.
[DEM+20] Christoph Dobraunig, Maria Eichlseder, Stefan Mangard, Florian Mendel,
Bart Mennink, Robert Primas, and Thomas Unterluggauer. Isap v2.0.IACR
Trans. Symmetric Cryptol., 2020(S1):390–416, 2020.
[DEMS15] Christoph Dobraunig, Maria Eichlseder, Florian Mendel, and Martin Schläﬀer.
Cryptanalysis of ascon. In Kaisa Nyberg, editor,Topics in Cryptology - CT-
RSA 2015, The Cryptographer’s Track at the RSA Conference 2015, San
Francisco, CA, USA, April 20-24, 2015. Proceedings, volume 9048 ofLecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 371–387. Springer, 2015.
[DEMS16] Christoph Dobraunig, Maria Eichlseder, Florian Mendel, and Martin Schläﬀer.
Ascon v1.2. submission to caesar competition. Technical report, 2016.
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 31
[DEMS21a] Christoph Dobraunig, Maria Eichlseder, Florian Mendel, and Martin Schläﬀer.
Ascon v1.2: Lightweight authenticated encryption and hashing.J. Cryptol.,
34(3):33, 2021.
[DEMS21b] Christoph Dobraunig, Maria Eichlseder, Florian Mendel, and Martin Schläﬀer.
Ascon v1.2. submission to nist. Technical report, 2021.
[DHP+20] Joan Daemen, Seth Hoﬀert, Michaël Peeters, Gilles Van Assche, and Ronny
Van Keer. Xoodyak, a lightweight cryptographic scheme. IACR Trans.
Symmetric Cryptol., 2020(S1):60–87, 2020.
[DHVV13] J. Daemen, S. Hoﬀert, G. Van Assche, and R. Van Keer. KeccakTools software.
https://github.com/KeccakTeam/KeccakTools, 2013.
[DHVV18a] J. Daemen, S. Hoﬀert, G. Van Assche, and R. Van Keer. XooTools software.
https://github.com/XoodooTeam/Xoodoo, 2018.
[DHVV18b] Joan Daemen, Seth Hoﬀert, Gilles Van Assche, and Ronny Van Keer. The
design of xoodoo and xooﬀf.IACR Trans. Symmetric Cryptol., 2018(4):1–38,
2018.
[DMA22] Joan Daemen, Silvia Mella, and Gilles Van Assche. Tighter trail bounds
for xoodoo. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Paper 2022/1088, 2022. https:
//eprint.iacr.org/2022/1088.
[DPAR00] Joan Daemen, Michaël Peeters, Gilles Van Assche, and Vincent Rijmen.
Nessie proposal: the block cipherNoekeon. Nessie submission, 2000.http:
//gro.noekeon.org/.
[DR20] Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen.The Design of Rijndael - The Advanced
Encryption Standard (AES), Second Edition. Information Security and Cryp-
tography. Springer, 2020.
[DV12] Joan Daemen and Gilles Van Assche. Diﬀerential propagation analysis of kec-
cak. In Anne Canteaut, editor,Fast Software Encryption - 19th International
Workshop, FSE 2012, Washington, DC, USA, March 19-21, 2012. Revised
Selected Papers, volume 7549 ofLecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
422–441. Springer, 2012.
[EME22] Johannes Erlacher, Florian Mendel, and Maria Eichlseder. Bounds for the
security of ascon against diﬀerential and linear cryptanalysis.IACR Trans.
Symmetric Cryptol., 2022(1):64–87, 2022.
[GPT21] David Gérault, Thomas Peyrin, and Quan Quan Tan. Exploring diﬀerential-
based distinguishers and forgeries for ASCON. IACR Trans. Symmetric
Cryptol., 2021(3):102–136, 2021.
[MDV17] Silvia Mella, Joan Daemen, and Gilles Van Assche. New techniques for
trail bounds and application to diﬀerential trails in Keccak.IACR Trans.
Symmetric Cryptol., 2017(1):329–357, 2017.
[MMGD22] Alireza Mehrdad, Silvia Mella, Lorenzo Grassi, and Joan Daemen. Diﬀerential
trail search in cryptographic primitives with big-circle chi: Application to
subterranean. IACR Trans. Symmetric Cryptol., 2022(2):253–288, 2022.
[MP13] Nicky Mouha and Bart Preneel. Towards Finding Optimal Diﬀerential Charac-
teristics for ARX: Application to Salsa20. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report
2013/328, 2013. https://ia.cr/2013/328.
32 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
[MR22] Rusydi H. Makarim and Raghvendra Rohit. Towards tight diﬀerential bounds
of ascon: A hybrid usage of smt and milp.IACR Transactions on Symmetric
Cryptology, 2022(3):303–340, 2022.
[SHW+14] Siwei Sun, Lei Hu, Peng Wang, Kexin Qiao, Xiaoshuang Ma, and Ling Song.
Automatic Security Evaluation and (Related-key) Diﬀerential Characteristic
Search: Application to SIMON, PRESENT, LBlock, DES(L) and Other
Bit-Oriented Block Ciphers. InAdvances in Cryptology - ASIACRYPT 2014,
volume 8873 ofLNCS, pages 158–178. Springer, 2014.
[TMC+21] Meltem Sonmez Turan, Kerry McKay, Donghoon Chang, Cagdas Calik,
Lawrence Bassham, Jinkeon Kang, and John Kelsey. Status report on the
second round of the nist lightweight cryptography standardization process,
2021.
[WH19] Hongjun Wu and Tao Huang. TinyJAMBU: A Family of LightweightAuthen-
ticated Encryption Algorithms, 2019.
A Representation of the aﬃne spaces overS.
In Table 7, for each possible column diﬀerence, we provide a representation of the aﬃne
space of compatible diﬀerences at the output ofS, the restriction weight, and the minimum
reverse weight. In Table 8, for each possible column mask, we provide a representation of
the aﬃne space of compatible masks at the input ofS, the correlation weight, and the
minimum reverse weight.
Solane El Hirch, Silvia Mella, Alireza Mehrdad and Joan Daemen 33
Table 7: Space of compatible diﬀerences at the output ofpS, restriction weight, and
minimum reverse weight for all possible column diﬀerences.
diﬀerence Aﬃne space after S wr(·) w rev(·)
00000 00000 0 0
00001 01001 + ⟨00010,00100,10001⟩ 3 2
00010 10001 + ⟨00010,00100,01000⟩ 3 2
00011 00001 + ⟨00100,01000,10001⟩ 3 3
00100 00110 + ⟨01000,10000⟩ 2 2
00101 10001 + ⟨00010,01001,01100⟩ 3 3
00110 00001 + ⟨00010,00100,01000,10000⟩ 4 2
00111 00010 + ⟨00001,00100,01000⟩ 3 3
01000 00110 + ⟨00001,01000,10000⟩ 3 2
01001 00001 + ⟨00010,10001,10100,11000⟩ 4 2
01010 00001 + ⟨00101,00110,01000,10000⟩ 4 2
01011 00010 + ⟨00001,00100,01000,10000⟩ 4 2
01100 00001 + ⟨10001,11000⟩ 2 2
01101 00001 + ⟨00010,00100,10001,11000⟩ 4 3
01110 00001 + ⟨00101,00110,10000⟩ 3 2
01111 01000 + ⟨00001,00100,10000⟩ 3 3
10000 01001 + ⟨00010,10001⟩ 2 2
10001 10001 + ⟨00010,00100⟩ 2 2
10010 00001 + ⟨00010,00100,01000,10001⟩ 4 3
10011 00010 + ⟨00110,01000⟩ 2 2
10100 00100 + ⟨00001,00010,01000⟩ 3 3
10101 00101 + ⟨00010,10100,11000⟩ 3 2
10110 10000 + ⟨00001,00010,00100,01000⟩ 4 2
10111 00010 + ⟨00110,01000,10000⟩ 3 2
11000 00100 + ⟨00001,00010,01000,10000⟩ 4 2
11001 01000 + ⟨00101,10110,11000⟩ 3 2
11010 00001 + ⟨00100,01001,01010,10000⟩ 4 2
11011 00010 + ⟨00001,00110,01000,10000⟩ 4 3
11100 00001 + ⟨00010,10001,11000⟩ 3 3
11101 01000 + ⟨00110,10101,11000⟩ 3 3
11110 01000 + ⟨00001,00010,00100,10000⟩ 4 2
11111 00010 + ⟨00001,00110,10000⟩ 3 3
34 Improved Diﬀerential and Linear Trail Bounds for ASCON
Table 8: Space of compatible masks at the input ofpS, correlation weight, and minimum
reverse weight for all possible column masks.
mask Aﬃne space before S wc(·) w rev(·)
00000 00000 0 0
00001 00011 + ⟨01000,10001⟩ 2 2
00010 01100 + ⟨00011,10000⟩ 2 2
00011 00100 + ⟨00001,00010,01000,10000⟩ 4 2
00100 01100 + ⟨00001,00010⟩ 2 2
00101 00100 + ⟨00001,00010,01000,10000⟩ 4 2
00110 00001 + ⟨10001,10010⟩ 2 2
00111 00010 + ⟨10001,11010⟩ 2 2
01000 10001 + ⟨01010,01100⟩ 2 2
01001 00001 + ⟨00010,00100,01000,10001⟩ 4 2
01010 00001 + ⟨01001,01010,01100,10000⟩ 4 2
01011 00010 + ⟨00001,00100,10010,11000⟩ 4 2
01100 10000 + ⟨00001,00010,00100,01000⟩ 4 2
01101 00001 + ⟨00010,00101,01000,10000⟩ 4 2
01110 00001 + ⟨10001,10010,10100,11000⟩ 4 2
01111 00010 + ⟨00001,01010,01100,10000⟩ 4 2
10000 00011 + ⟨01000,10101⟩ 2 2
10001 10001 + ⟨00100,01000⟩ 2 2
10010 00001 + ⟨00101,00110,01000,10000⟩ 4 2
10011 00001 + ⟨00011,00100,01000,10000⟩ 4 2
10100 00100 + ⟨00001,00010,01000,10100⟩ 4 4
10101 10000 + ⟨00001,00010,00100,01000⟩ 4 2
10110 00001 + ⟨00100,01000,10001,10010⟩ 4 2
10111 00001 + ⟨00100,01000,10001,10010⟩ 4 2
11000 00001 + ⟨00010,00100,01000,10001⟩ 4 2
11001 00100 + ⟨00010,01100⟩ 2 2
11010 00001 + ⟨00010,00100,10001,11000⟩ 4 2
11011 00100 + ⟨00001,00010,01100,10000⟩ 4 2
11100 00001 + ⟨00010,01000,10001,10100⟩ 4 2
11101 01000 + ⟨00010,01101⟩ 2 2
11110 00001 + ⟨00010,10001,10100,11000⟩ 4 2
11111 00100 + ⟨00001,00010,01100,10000⟩ 4 2