IACR Transactions on Symmetric Cryptology
ISSN 2519-173X, Vol. 2018, No. 1, pp. 126–159. DOI:10.13154/tosc.v2018.i1.126-159
Column Parity Mixers
Ko Stoﬀelen1∗ and Joan Daemen1,2
1 Digital Security Group, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
k.stoffelen@cs.ru.nl,joan@cs.ru.nl
2 STMicroelectronics, Diegem, Belgium
Abstract. We present column parity mixers (CPM), a generalization of theθ mixing
layer that is used inKeccak. Thanks to our description using matrix arithmetic, we
can easily derive algebraic, diﬀusion, and mask propagation properties, leading to
a surprising distinction between two types of CPMs. We compare CPMs to other
popular types of mixing layers and argue that CPMs can be more eﬃcient. While
Keccak has a bit-oriented structure, we make the case that CPMs are also suitable
for nibble- or byte-oriented designs.
We outline a general substitution-permutation-network-based design strategy using a
CPM, for which we show how one can attain strong bounds for diﬀerential and linear
trails. We apply this strategy concretely to design a 256-bit permutation with an
eﬃcient inverse and strong trail bounds. Our permutation design uses a number of
ideas that are of independent interest and allows a fast bitsliced implementation that
compares quite well with other established ciphers and permutations.
Keywords: mixing layers· iterative permutations· iterative block ciphers
1 Introduction
In recent years, there has been a lot of research on lightweight cryptography. A need is
perceived for cryptographic primitives that can be implemented on resource-constrained
platforms, such as devices in the Internet-of-Things. Historically the most important
primitives were block ciphers, but since a few years cryptographic permutations gain in
popularity. Most of these ciphers consist of the repeated application of an invertible round
function, where in the case of block ciphers each round takes a round key. As inspired by
DES [77] and later AES [DR02], often the round function consists of a number of separate
layers, each with a particular task. There is typically a non-linear S-box layer and a linear
diﬀusion layer. In some modern ciphers, this linear layer consists of a sub-layer that mixes
the bits (or bytes) and typically has a high branch number [DR02], and a transposition
sub-layer that moves bits (or bytes around). In AES, the mixing layer MixColumns consists
of the parallel application of a maximum-distance separable (MDS) mapping on each
of the 4-byte columns. This mapping has branch number 5, the maximum attainable
value. In combination with the transposition layer ShiftRows, this allows to give a simple
proof for a strong upper bound on the diﬀerential probability of 4-round diﬀerential trails
(characteristics) and the correlation of 4-round linear trails.
With lightweight cryptography in mind, there has been a substantial amount of
publications in the last few years on constructions for lightweight MDS mappings, see
e.g., [BKL16; GPP11; LS16; LW16]. This has led to a better understanding of the
implementation cost of such mappings in relation to their dimensions: the number and
∗This work was supported by the European Commission through the Horizon 2020 program under
project number ICT-645622 (PQCRYPTO).
Licensed under Creative Commons License CC-BY 4.0.
Received: 2017-06-01, Revised: 2017-11-23, Accepted: 2018-01-23, Published: 2018-03-01

Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 127
size of elements (e.g., 4 bytes in MixColumns). We can now build block ciphers and
permutations with the same design philosophy as AES, leading to easily provable bounds
with more lightweight components.
Another cipher where the designers emphasize the mixing layer isKeccak-f, the
permutation underlyingKeccak and the SHA-3 functions [Ber+11b; NIS15]. Its mixing
layer θdoes not operate on separate subblocks as MixColumns does, and it has a branch
number of 4. However, despite the fact that it requires only 2 XOR operations per bit,
in combination with the other layers of the round function it appears to have quite good
diﬀusion. In particular, [MDA17] reports on computer-aided proofs for quite promising
upper bounds for the diﬀerential probability of diﬀerential trails. It appears thatθ-like
mappings would be a good candidate for a linear mixing layer, or in general for a mixing
layer with a good trade-oﬀ between implementation cost and mixing power.
There is a remarkable diﬀerence between AES andKeccak-f. In the former, all step
mappings are deﬁned in terms of operations on bytes and in the latter each step mapping
treats groupings of bits along diﬀerent axes. The AES design approach has received quite
some following and it can be called byte-oriented (although there are also ciphers where
these units are 4-bit nibbles or even 5-bit units). We call theKeccak-f design approach
bit-oriented. The byte-oriented design approach has the advantage that one can easily
prove bounds. We believe thatθ-like mappings are suitable for both design approaches.
The latter may have an inverse with high implementation cost but also with very
interesting diﬀusion properties (see Section 4). They are suited for permutations used in
MACs or in stream encryption, or in conjunction with authenticated encryption modes
that do not require the inverse such as the sponge and duplex constructions [Ber+11a],
where the permutation width is also less bound to a power of two.
We seeKeccak-f as a representative example of a bit-oriented design that makes
use of a column parity mixing layer and we make the case that they are also suitable for
byte-oriented designs. In Section 5 we outline a general design strategy with attention for
how strong bounds can be attained for diﬀerential and linear trails. We apply this strategy
concretely to design a 256-bit permutation called Mixifer with an eﬃcient inverse. This
can be used as a permutation in an Even-Mansour block cipher [EM93] or in modes such
as proposed in [Men16]. The width of 256 is large enough to make the birthday bound
2128 far enough to not pose a practical problem and it is small enough to still be called
lightweight.
Our permutation design, presented in Section 6, uses a number of ideas that are of
independent interest. It operates on an array of 4 rows of 16 nibbles each and we arrange
the bits of the nibbles in such a way that a bitsliced implementation is immediate. Its
design can be seen as a hybrid between that of AES and that ofKeccak-f. We show
in Section 6.6 that in comparison with AES and some established permutations, the
performance of our permutation is better or comparable.
2 Column parity mixers and their properties
2.1 Our contributions
In this paper we present a generalization of theθmixing layer inKeccak-f called column
parity mixers (CPMs). CPMs operate on two-dimensional arrays and in their deﬁnition
parities computed over the columns play a central role, hence the namecolumn parity
mixers. In Section 2 we provide an elegant description using matrix arithmetic, allowing
us to easily derive algebraic, diﬀusion, and mask propagation properties. We also show
that column parity mixers operating on states with an even number of rows have quite
diﬀerent properties from those operating on an odd number of rows.
The former are involutions and are ideally suited for block ciphers and permutations
128 Column Parity Mixers
that need to have an eﬃcient inverse. Coincidentally, those are the ones that are typically
required to have a permutation width (or ‘block size’) that is a power of two, and this is
nicely compatible with an even number of rows. An example is disk encryption where the
disk sector size is a power of two. Column parity mixers are generalizations of the mixing
layer θin Keccak. Therefore, we adopt the terminology proposed in [Ber+11b]. Unlike
the descriptions therein, we will treat the states that these mixing layers operate on as
two-dimensional arrays that we will interpret as matrices. In the context of this section
we limit ourselves to matrices with elements ofGF(2), but one can easily generalize our
treatment to elements ofGF(p) with p a prime or even elements of an arbitrary ﬁnite
group.
2.2 Matrices
We useI to denote a (square) identity matrix and0 to denote an all-zero matrix. We
assume that the dimensions of these matrices are determined by the context. The transpose
of a matrixA is denoted asAT.
We use1x to denote a column vector ofx components that are all equal to1. Conse-
quently,1T
x is an all-1 row vector withx components. We use1y
x to denote a matrix with
x rows andy columns with all components 1. Clearly,1y
x = 1x1T
y.
The element of a matrixA at rowi and columnj is denoted byAi,j. If B = AT, we
have Bi,j = Aj,i. The trace of a square matrix is the linear function that simply takes the
sum of its diagonal elements. It is denoted bytr(A), sotr(A) =∑
iAi,i.
2.3 Deﬁnition of column parity mixers
We consider linear mappingsθthat operate on arrays withm rows andn columns.
Deﬁnition 1. The column parityof a matrixA is a (row) vector deﬁned as1T
mA.
In a matrixA, a columnx is called even (odd) if the component with indexx in 1T
mA
is zero (one).
Deﬁnition 2. The expanded column parityof A is a matrix withm rows all equal to the
column parity ofA, and it is given by1m
mA.
A column parity mixer (CPM) makes use of a linear transformation operating on
the column parity of a matrix, called itsparity-folding transformation. We denote the
parity-folding transformation by multiplying the column parity with a square matrixZ at
the right. We call then×n matrix Z the parity-folding matrixof θ. We are now ready to
deﬁne theθ-eﬀect of a matrixA.
Deﬁnition 3. The θ-eﬀect of A with respect toZ is a row vector, denoted aseZ(A) (or
just e(A) if Z is clear from the context) and is deﬁned byeZ(A) =1T
mAZ.
For a given inputA and parity-folding matrix Z, a column x is called unaﬀected
(aﬀected) if the component with indexx in eZ(A) is zero (non-zero). Whether a column
is aﬀected or not is fully determined by the column parity ofA and the columnx of the
parity-folding matrixZ.
Deﬁnition 4. The expandedθeﬀect of A with respect toZ is a matrix withm rows all
equal to the CPM eﬀect, namely,EZ(A) =1m
mAZ.
A column parity mixerθsimply consists in computing the expandedθ-eﬀect of a matrix
A and adding it toA.
Deﬁnition 5. The column parity mixerθusing parity-folding matrixZ is deﬁned as:
θ(A) =A+ EZ(A) =A+ 1m
mAZ.
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 129
Note that a column parity mixer is fully deﬁned by a parity-folding matrixZ and m.
Example 1.Keccak [Ber+11b] uses a three-dimensional structure, so, for the sake of this
example, let us ﬁrst ‘ﬂatten’ the state by looking at a single sheet. WithKeccak-f[200],
this array would havem= 5rows andn= 8columns. Consider the following stateA:
A=

]]]]
0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0
1 0 0 0 0 1 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0
0 0 1 0 0 1 0 0
0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0

[
.
Then thecolumn parityof A is [1,1,0,0,0,1,0,0], so the ﬁrst two columns and the sixth
column areodd, while the rest iseven. Theθstep inKeccak-f aﬀects the adjacent sheets,
but one can modify it slightly such that the operation is performed within the same sheet.
To the reader who is familiar with theKeccak speciﬁcation, we changex−1 mod 5 and
x+ 1mod 5 to xmod 5 in the computation ofD[x,z] given C[x,z]. This means that we
can express theparity-folding matrixZ as follows:
Z =

]]]]]]]]]]
1 0 0 0 0 0 0 1
1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 1 1 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 1 1 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 1 1 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 1 1 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1

[
.
This yields aθ-eﬀect of e(A) = [0,1,0,0,1,1,0,1], so the second, ﬁfth, sixth, and eighth
column areaﬀected, the rest isunaﬀected. The result of thecolumn parity mixerdeﬁned
by Z and m on A is then:
θ(A) =

]]]]
0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1
1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1
0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1
0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1
0 0 1 0 1 0 0 1

[
.
2.4 Group properties
Composition of two column parity mixers is again a column parity mixer.
Lemma 1. Let α = θ′◦θwith θand θ′column parity mixer with parity-folding matrices
Z and Z′respectively. Thenα is a column parity mixer. Ifm is even, the parity-folding
matrix ofα is Z+ Z′. If m is odd, its parity-folding matrix is(Z′+ I)(Z+ I) +I.
Proof. We have
θ′(θ(A)) =A+ 1m
mAZ+ 1m
m(A+ 1m
mAZ) Z′
= A+ 1m
mAZ+ 1m
mAZ′+ (1m
m)2AZZ′.
If m is even, we have(1m
m)2 = 0 and this reduces toA+ 1m
mA(Z+ Z′). If m is odd, we
have (1m
m)2 = 1m
m and we have
θ′(θ(A)) =A+ 1m
mA(Z+ Z′+ ZZ′)
= A+ 1m
mA((Z+ I)(Z′+ I) +I) .
⊓ ⊔
130 Column Parity Mixers
This implies the following corollary:
Corollary 1. The set of all column parity mixers for given dimensionsm×n, withm
even, form a group with composition that is isomorphic to the abelian group(Zn2
2 ,+).
Proof. Lemma 1 says that the composition of two CPMs with parity-folding matricesZ
and Z′is the CPM with parity-folding matrixZ+ Z′. It follows that the set of all CPMs
of given dimensionsm×n and m even, is isomorphic to the set of binaryn×n matrices
with addition. This addition is closed and inherits the associativity and commutativity
from the addition inGF(2). Its neutral element is0 and each element is its own inverse.
This is(Zn2
2 ,+). ⊓ ⊔
It follows that column parity mixers operating on matrices with an even numberm of
rows are involutions.
For m odd, not all column parity mixers are invertible. We have the following:
Corollary 2. The set of column parity mixers for given dimensionsm×n, withm odd
and Z+ I non-singular, form a group with composition that is isomorphic to the group of
binary invertiblen×n matrices with multiplication.
Proof. Lemma 1 says that the composition of two CPMs with parity-folding matricesZ
and Z′is the CPM with parity-folding matrix(Z+ I)(Z′+ I) +I. Let us callZ+ I the
associated matrix of a CPM. Then the associated matrix of the composition of two CPMs
is the product of their associate matrices. It follows that the set of all CPMs of given
dimensions m×n and m odd, is isomorphic to the set of invertible binaryn×n matrices
with multiplication. This is the general linear groupGL(n,2) [DF04]. ⊓ ⊔
Formodd, the order of a CPM is the multiplicative order of its associated matrixZ+I.
The associated matrix of the inverse of an invertible CPM with parity-folding matrixZ is
(Z+ I)−1.
2.5 The special case of circulant parity-folding matrices
Z is a circulant matrix if its elements satisfyZi+j mod n, j= Zi,0 for alli,j. Circulant
matrices have become a popular building block in many ciphers, including AES [DR02]
and Keccak [Ber+11b]. As the product and sum of two circulant matrices is a circulant
matrix and bothI and 0 are circulant matrices, it follows that both form even and odd
the set of invertible circulant CPMs form subgroups of the set of invertible CPMs, for
given dimensions.
We can express multiplication by a circulant matrix as multiplication by a polynomial.
For that purpose, we express a matrixAas a bivariate polynomial, where the element in row
i and columnj corresponds with the coeﬃcient of monomialxiyj. Computing the column
parity ofA corresponds with multiplication by the polynomial∑n−1
i=0 yi modulo 1 +yn.
This polynomial can also be expressed as1+yn
1+y . Multiplication by Z then corresponds
with multiplication by a polynomialz(x) modulo 1 +xn. So for our column parity mixer
θ, we have:
θ(a(x,y)) =a(x,y) +1 +ym
1 +y z(x)a(x,y) mod (1 +xn)(1 +ym) .
We callz(x) the parity-folding polynomial.
Circulant CPMs with evenmare involutions. A circulant CPM with oddmis invertible
if its associated polynomial1 +z(x) is coprime to1 +xn and its inverse has the associated
polynomial y(x) = (z(x) + 1)−1 mod (1 +xn). A necessary condition for invertibility is
that z(x) has an even number of non-zero terms. If not,1 +x divides both1 +z(x) and
1 +xn.
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 131
The transpose ofθis determined by the parity-folding polynomialz(x−1) mod 1 +xn,
i.e., the polynomialz(x) where the termsxi are replaced byxn−i.
2.6 Computational cost
Computing the column parities costsm−1 additions inGF(2) per column totalling to
(m−1)n additions. Adding the eﬀect to the matrix costs one addition per bit totalling to
mnbinary additions. So the total computational cost is(2m−1)nplus the computational
cost of applyingZ to the parity.
For circulant mixers withh the Hamming weight ofz(x), a straightforward parity-
folding implementation would cost(h−1)n, totalling to(2m+ h−2)n. Dividing by the
total number of bits in the state, this results in a computational cost per bit of2+( h−2)/m.
Remarkably, for parity-folding polynomials with two non-zero terms, the cost is exactly2
additions per bit.
The number of additions gives a good idea of the circuit complexity in dedicated
hardwareandthenumberofbinaryXORgatesinbitslice-orientedsoftwareimplementations.
In the latter, the eﬃciency additionally depends on the way the state can be mapped onto
CPU words and computingθmay involve additional (cyclic) shift operations. Section 6.5
shows the exact cost for a concrete example.
3 Propagation of linear masks
After having explained what CPMs are, this section discusses its properties related to
linear cryptanalysis [Mat94]. We ﬁrst provide a brief overview of linear propagation for
generic iterated permutations, before discussing CPM-speciﬁc details.
3.1 Linear propagation in iterated permutations
Linear cryptanalysis (LC) exploits large correlations across a cryptographic primitive and
resistance against it is one of the main criteria of modern cryptographic design. It can be
described in diﬀerent ways and we adopt the notation and formalism used in [DR02].
In LC we consider a sum (inGF(2)) of bits (usually calledparities) at the output of
a mapping and try to ﬁnd sums of bits at the input of the mapping that have a high
correlation with the sum at the output. Exactly which bits are included in the sums is
described withmasks. Masks have the same dimensions and shape as the state and indicate
the bits included in a sum by having a 1 in the corresponding positions and 0 in all other
positions. While the correlations are between sums of input bits and sums of output bits,
we will indicate these by the term mask to make the descriptions more readable. Masks
play a role in LC similar to that ofdiﬀerences in diﬀerential cryptanalysis (DC).
In iterated permutations or block ciphers, a correlation between an output maskv and
an input masku can be split into a number oflinear trails. The value of the correlation is
the sum of thecorrelation contributionsof these individual trails. Note that correlations
and correlation contributions have a sign, so there can be destructive interference. A linear
trail Q over ann-round permutation (or block cipher) consists of a sequence ofn+ 1
masks: a mask at the input of each roundqi and a maskqn at the output of the last
round. A pair of consecutive masksqi,qi+1 has a certain correlation over roundi, denoted
as C(qi,qi+1). The correlation contributionC(Q) of a linear trailQ is simply the product
of the correlations over all its rounds:∏n−1
i=0 C(qi,qi+1).
The value of an input-output correlationC(u,v) is given by:
C(u,v) =

Q with q0=u,qn=v
C(Q) .
132 Column Parity Mixers
Large input-output correlations can hence occur if there are linear trails with large
correlation contributions (e.g., in the block cipher DES [Mat94]) but it can in principle
also occur when there is systematic clustering of huge numbers of trails with very small
correlation contribution. (An artiﬁcial example is a permutationP that consists of a
permutation P′followed by its inverseP′−1. The permutationP is the identity and hence
has many large input-output correlations but no high-correlation linear trails ifP′has
none.)
Modern ciphers should be designed taking LC into account and hence should not have
linear trails with high correlation contributions. A way to achieve this with a relatively
small number of rounds is called thewide trail strategy[DR02], underlying many modern
designs including AES andKeccak. In this strategy, the mixing layer in the round
function plays an important role. To study the correlation contribution of linear trails, we
need to study correlations over the round function. The round function typically consists
of a non-linear layer and a linear layer. The description of the correlation properties of
non-linear S-box layers can be eﬃciently computed using the Walsh-Hadamard transform.
Linear layers have the property that every output mask is correlated to exactly one input
mask and that the correlation is one. In other words, there is a deterministic function that
maps masksv at the output of a linear layer to masksu at its input. In the following
subsection, we will derive an expression for this functionu= f(v).
3.2 Mask propagation in column parity mixers
We want to express this function in our matrix notation. As an intermediate step, we
ﬁrst need a way to express a sum of speciﬁc bits of a matrix, for which we use the trace
function.
The trace function has a number of interesting properties that we will exploit in our
derivation:
•Linearity: tr(A+ B) = tr(A) + tr(B).
•Transpose-invariance: tr(AT) = tr(A).
•Commute-invariance: forA and B with compatible dimensions andAB a square
matrix, it is easy to show thattr(AB) = tr(BA) [LLM16].
•Multiplication-cyclicinvariance: foranysequenceofmatrices A,B,C,...,Z withcom-
patibledimensionsandwith AB···Zasquarematrix: tr(AB···Z) = tr(BC···ZA) =
tr(CD···ZAB) =....
A maskV has the same dimensions as the matrixA and it speciﬁes the sum (inGF(2))
of the elements ofA in positions whereV has a one, i.e.,∑
i,jVi,jAi,j. This cannot be
expressed as a matrix multiplication, but we can express it with the trace function.
Lemma 2. The sum of the elements ofA selected by the maskV can be expressed as
tr(VTA) .
Proof. Let B = VTA, then Bj,j = ∑
iVi,jAi,j. As tr(B) = ∑
jBj,j, it follows that
tr(VTA) =∑
i,jVi,jAi,j. ⊓ ⊔
Lemma 3. A sum of bits at the input ofθdeﬁned by a maskU equals a sum of bits at
the output ofθdeﬁned by maskV if and only if
U = V + 1m
mVZT .
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 133
Proof. Let B be the image ofAthrough the column parity matrix. Then giventr(UTA) =
tr(VTB), we want to derive the relation betweenU and V. In particular, given the mask
V at the output ofθ, we can compute the maskU at its input by ﬁlling in the expression
for B:
tr(UTA) = tr(VT(A+ 1m
mAZ))
= tr(VTA+ VT1m
mAZ)
= tr(VTA) + tr(VT1m
mAZ) .
For the rightmost term, using multiplication-cyclic invariance gives tr(VT1m
mAZ) =
tr(ZVT1m
mA). Moreover, usingZVT1m
m = (1m
m
TVZT)
T
with 1m
m
T = 1m
m yields
tr(UTA) = tr(VTA) + tr((1m
mVZT)
T
A)
= tr(VTA+ (1m
mVZT)
T
A)
= tr((V + 1m
mVZT)
T
A) .
⊓ ⊔
We call the mapping fromV to U speciﬁed in Lemma 3 the transpose ofθand denote it
as θT. The expression of Lemma 3 is essential when searching for linear trails, as reported
on in Section 5.3.
4 Diﬀusion properties
The diﬀusion properties of an MDS matrix are typically summarized by its diﬀerential
and linear branch numbers [DR02] that are both the same and equal to the dimension
of the matrix plus 1. This dimension is also the number of elements a single-element
diﬀerence propagates to. The study of the diﬀusion properties of an MDS matrix is largely
independent of the other steps in the round function. For example, the proof of the fact
that every 4-round trail in AES has 25 active S-boxes only requires from the MixColumns
matrix that it is MDS.
Diﬀusion in column parity mixers is more subtle: their properties only become mean-
ingful in the context of a design approach, where interaction with other steps of the round
function must be taken into account. In this section we discuss some concepts that are
shared by all column parity mixers.
4.1 The column parity kernel
The set of statesA with column parity equal to zero form a vector space with dimension
n(m−1). Following [Ber+11b], we call this the(column parity) kernel. For statesA in
the kernel the parity is zero and consequentlyθreduces to the identity mapping.
There are states in the kernel with Hamming weight 2, namely all states with a pair of
active bits in the same column. Again following [Ber+11b], we call this anorbital. States
in the kernel have an even number of active bits per column and as observed in [MDA17],
they can be seen as a collection of orbitals. Due to the existence of single-orbital states,
the (Hamming) branch number, both diﬀerentially and linearly, of every column parity
mixer is at most 4. We prove that for all reasonable choices ofm,n and Z, the branch
number is 4.
Lemma 4.An invertible CPMθwith m≥2 and whereZ has no all-zero rows or columns,
has diﬀerential and linear branch numbers 4, with the only exception of the case where
m= n= 2and Z = I.
134 Column Parity Mixers
Proof. The branch number is at most 4 asθwill map a single-orbital state to a single-orbital
state.
Let us ﬁrst look at the diﬀerential branch number. The diﬀerential branch number can
only become smaller than 4 if there is a single-bit state that is mapped to a state with less
than 3 bits byθor θ−1.
Let us ﬁrst look at a single-bit state at the input ofθ. A single-bit stateA leads to a
single-bit parity. Let the number of aﬀected columns in theθ-eﬀect bex. We know that
x≥1 as Z has at least one 1 per row. If these aﬀected columns overlap with the column
with the single 1 inA, then the Hamming weight ofθ(A) is xm−1. If not, it isxm+ 1.
Let ν denote the sum of the Hamming weights ofA and θ(A). It follows thatν= xm
and ν= xm+ 2, respectively. We now distinguish between the cases wherem is even and
where m is odd.
•Even m: if there was no overlap,ν= xm+ 2≥4. If there was overlap,ν= xm= 2
only if x = 1 and m = 2: so a single aﬀected column overlapping with the odd
column. But this is exactly the case that is excluded in the lemma. As for evenm
we haveθ−1 = θ, that case is proven too.
•Odd m: if x= 1, i.e., there is one aﬀected column, then it cannot overlap. Namely,
if that is the case, it implies a single 1 in the corresponding row that is on the main
diagonal. But forθto be invertible,Z+ I must be invertible and ifZ contains a
row with a single 1 and that is on the main diagonal, that row is 0 inZ+ I and
hence it is not invertible. The same reasoning applies toθ−1 as Z′+ I with Z′the
parity-folding matrix ofθ−1 must be invertible.
For the linear branch number it suﬃces to replaceθby θT and rows ofZ become
columns ofZ. ⊓ ⊔
Example 2.The simplest possible CPM that satisﬁes the conditions of Lemma 4 operates
on two rows and two columns and has
Z =
[0 1
1 0
]
.
If the 4 bits of the state are arranged in a 4-bit column vector,θcan be expressed as
multiplying it with the following familiar matrix:

]]
1 1 0 1
1 1 1 0
0 1 1 1
1 0 1 1

[.
This matrix was ﬁrst used in the block cipher MMB [DGV93] and is still used in many
modern lightweight ciphers (sometimes modulo some row and/or column permutations),
where it is often referred to as a near-MDS matrix. See for instance Minalpher [Sas+15],
L0 and L3 in PRIDE [Alb+14], or Midori [Ban+15]. It has an implementation cost of1.5
additions per bit. To see that the CPM with the givenZ and the matrix are very similar,
let
A=
[a b
c d
]
.
Then, using a CPM:
θ(A) =A+ 12
2AZ =
[a b
c d
]
+
[1 1
1 1
][a b
c d
][0 1
1 0
]
=
[a+ b+ d a + b+ c
b+ c+ d a + c+ d
]
.
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 135
Similarly: 
]]
1 1 0 1
1 1 1 0
0 1 1 1
1 0 1 1

[

]]
a
b
c
d

[=

]]
a+ b+ d
a+ b+ c
b+ c+ d
a+ c+ d

[.
We now consider the size of the column parity kernel by counting the number of states
with a given number of orbitals. The number of single-orbital states, i.e., that have in
total 4 active bits before and afterθ, is given in following lemma.
Lemma 5. The number of single-orbital states isn
(m
2
)
.
Proof. The orbital can be in one ofn columns and the number of possible positions of the
bits of the orbital in the column is
(m
2
)
. ⊓ ⊔
If we divide the number of 2-bit states in the kernel by the state size, we obtainm−1
2 .
In this respect, it is advantageous for a given state size to have a small number of rows
and a large number of columns.
We can similarly compute the number of states in the kernel with 2, 3, 4, etc. orbitals.
The number of such states increases exponentially with the number of active bits. For
example, we have the following lemma on the number of two-orbital states.
Lemma 6. The number of two-orbital states is
(n
2
)(m
2
)2
+ n
(m
4
)
where the second term
disappears form< 4.
Proof. We can partition the set of states with two orbitals into two subsets: those where
the orbitals are in diﬀerent columns and those where they are in the same column. For
the ﬁrst set of states, one can position the 2 orbitals in then columns in
(n
2
)
ways and
each of the two orbitals can take
(m
2
)
positions. Their product accounts for the ﬁrst term.
For the second set of states, the 4 active bits can be in one ofn columns and the number
of possible positions among thembits of that column is
(m
4
)
. If m< 4, of course no 4 bits
can be stuﬀed in a column and the second term disappears. ⊓ ⊔
4.2 Propagation of isolated bits
Often one tries to determine the minimum number of rounds such that each output bit
depends on each input bit, typically calledfull diﬀusion. One way of measuring full
diﬀusion is propagating single-bit input diﬀerences or a single-bit output mask through
the rounds. In this context it is interesting to see how single-bit diﬀerences propagate.
A single-bit diﬀerence at the input ofθpropagates to on average1 +|Z|mbits, with|Z|
the Hamming weight ofZ divided by its dimension. For the circulant case, this is exactly
1 +|z(x)|m with |z(x)|the Hamming weight of the parity-folding polynomial, assuming
its constant term is 0. The same holds for propagation of single-bit masks at the output of
θto the input. For a single-bit diﬀerence at the output (or single-bit mask at the input)
of θwe have to distinguish between two cases. Ifm is even, the column parity mixer is an
involution and the same properties hold as in the forward direction. For oddm, we have
to consider the column parity mixer deﬁned byZ′= (Z+ I)−1 + I. The matrixZ′may
have much higher Hamming weight thanZ, as is illustrated byθin Keccak [Ber+11b]
and even for large states, full diﬀusion in the backward direction can be immediate.
4.3 Comparison to other mixing layers
Mixing layers can be compared by their cost, where cost can mean the number of additions,
but also the number of cycles on a speciﬁc CPU microarchitecture or other quantities.
136 Column Parity Mixers
Table 1:Comparison of mixing layers.
Cipher/permutation Type Dimensions Additions
per bit
Branch
number
AES MDS 4 ×4, GF(28) 3.03 5
Joltik [JNP15] MDS 4 ×4, GF(24) 3 5
PHOTON [GPP11] MDS 6 ×6, GF(24)* 5† 7
Prøst [Kav+14] MDS 16 ×16, GF(2) 4.5† 5
Midori [Ban+15] Not MDS ‡ 4 ×4, GF(24) or GF(28) 1.5 4
Minalpher [Sas+15] Not MDS‡ 4 ×4, GF(24) 1.5 4
Prince [Bor+12] Not MDS 64 ×64, GF(2) 1.5 4
SKINNY [Bei+16] Not MDS 4 ×4, GF(24) or GF(28) 0.75 2
Keccak-f [Ber+11b] CPM 5 ×5 ×w§, GF(2) 2 4
Circulant CPM CPM m×n 2 +h−2
m
∥ 4
* Dimensions are forP100, P144, andP196.
†Unknown whether it can be computed with less additions.
‡Can also be considered to be a CPM, following Example 2.
§ Where w∈{8,16,32,64}, depending on which variant ofKeccak-f.
∥Where h is the Hamming weight ofz(x). Additions/bit∈[2 −1/m,2 + (n−2)/m].
Here we consider the number of binary additions or two-input XOR gates, as that is
independent from CPUs or standard cell libraries.
Mixing layers should also be compared by their ‘mixing power’. This is best quantiﬁed
by bounds on linear and diﬀerential trails, but that requires to study a full permutation.
We will do so in Section 6.3, but for the moment we restrict ourselves to only consider
the mixing layer itself. This implies that we are limited to use the linear and diﬀerential
branch numbers that should be high relative to the dimensions of the state.
Ever since SHARK [Rij+96] and AES [DR02], MDS matrices have been a common
choice for a mixing layer as their branch numbers are optimal. The past few years have
seen a lot of work on searching for more eﬃcient MDS matrices. A noteworthy development
is that of serialization of the mixing layer, ﬁrst put forward by PHOTON [GPP11] and
LED [Guo+11]. This decreases the hardware area that is required to implement matrix
multiplication. Another line of work focussed more directly on searching MDS matrices
that require less additions [BKL16; LS16; LW16; LW17].
While there has been a lot of improvement, it was always assumed that there was a
ﬁxed cost ofn(n−1)m additions [BKL16], derived from summing all the multiplication
results. Recently, it has been shown that this lower bound does not really hold when global
optimizations are taken into account [Kra+17]. In fact, there exist MDS matrices that can
be implemented with less additions.
Other ciphers such as PRIDE [Alb+14], Midori [Ban+15], Minalpher [Sas+15], and
SKINNY [Bei+16] have dropped the MDS requirement to achieve a better trade-oﬀ between
performance and security.
Table 1 provides a comparison of mixing layers. Most cost numbers are computed using
the results of [Kra+17]. We list the number of additions per bit, in order to normalize for
the diﬀerent dimensions. While more lightweight mixing layers exist, CPMs oﬀer a good
trade-oﬀ. It should be noted, however, that bounds over multiple rounds for a concrete
scheme are much more meaningful than just a pair of branch numbers.
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 137
5 A general design strategy
In this section, we present a design strategy for the round function of nibble- or byte-
oriented iterative block ciphers or permutations, viewed as a substitution-permutation
network (SPN), where a CPM is embedded as its mixing layer. We also outline a search
strategy for truncated linear and diﬀerential trails. In Section 6, we instantiate this
design strategy with a speciﬁc permutation and give security bounds and implementation
benchmarks.
5.1 Structure of the round function
We take theb-bit state to be a rectangle withm rows andn columns. The state consists
of mn cells of sizeℓ, sob= ℓmn. The cells are typically nibbles (l= 4) or bytes (l= 8)
for software performance reasons, although other values are also possible. The cells can be
seen as elements of GF(2ℓ).
The round function consists of four layers:
•A nonlinear S-box layerγ, that applies the same invertible S-box to every cell.
•A column parity mixerθ. Although it operates on elements of GF(2ℓ), the parity-
folding matrix only contains 0 and 1.
•A transposition layer. This consists of two steps: one that permutes the rows called
π and one that performs cyclic shift operations (rotations) on the rows, calledρ.
•The addition of round constants.
In the case of a block cipher, round keys can be added between the rounds that are
derived from a cipher key (and a possible tweak in the case of tweakable block ciphers)
by means of a key schedule. In this paper we consider the design of key schedules out of
scope.
The roles of the diﬀerent layers are the same as in the well-known wide trail strategy.
The role of the round constants is to remove invariants of the round function:
•Invariance of the round function with respect to simple transformations of the
mappings of the state, such as rotations. Attacks relevant in this context are
rotational cryptanalysis [KN10].
•Invariance of the round function across the diﬀerent rounds. Relevant in this context
are slide attacks [BW99].
•Existence of sets that are invariant under the round function. Relevant attacks are
here invariant subspace attacks [Lea+11].
5.2 Outline of the steps in our design approach
We assume the designers are faced with the request to design a permutation or block
cipher with some given widthb, that must be eﬃcient on some given set of platforms.
They also know whether side-channel attacks are a concern leading to the requirement
of constant-time code or the ability to mask eﬃciently, and whether the inverse of the
mapping must be eﬃcient.
The ﬁrst step in the design process consists of choosingℓ, m, andnwith the constraint
ℓmn= b. As we have showed in Section 4.1, choosingm large compared ton implies that
there will be more states in the kernel ofθ. Diﬀusion of isolated bits, however, beneﬁts
from choosingm large, as shown in Section 4.2.
138 Column Parity Mixers
Once ℓis determined, one can design theγ S-box quasi-independently of the other
components of the round function. Important metrics are its algebraic degree, the maximum
input-output correlation, the maximum diﬀerential probability, but also its implementation
cost. For the latter, one should take into account which are the main implementation
targets, such as ASICs, bitsliced software, or software using table look-ups. This is not
diﬀerent from most design strategies.
The design ofθ, π, andρcan be performed in two phases, taking advantage of the
kernel property of CPMs.
In a ﬁrst phase, propagation is investigated of diﬀerence patterns and masks inside
the kernel and that aretruncated [Knu95]. The latter means that at cell level we do not
consider the actual values but only whether the cell in the pattern is passive (all-zero) or
active (non-zero). For such patterns,θacts as the identity function, as we impose that
they are in the kernel. Moreover,γacts as the identity, because the S-box is invertible and
hence a non-zero input diﬀerence leads to a non-zero output diﬀerence, and any sum of
bits at the output is balanced and hence a non-zero mask at the output cannot propagate
to an all-zero mask at the input. It follows that the propagation of such patterns is fully
determined by the transposition stepsπ and ρ. As these steps just move cells around and
do not mix them, this propagation is fullydeterministic. Moreover, transpositions are
their own transpose and hence masks and diﬀerence patterns propagate in the same way.
Hence one can take a patternA0 in the kernel and propagate it forward throughρ◦π
resulting inA1. If the resulting pattern can be in the kernel, one can propagate one more
round and so on. A pattern that has at least one column with a single active cell cannot
be in the kernel, all other patterns can. In a column with two active cells, these must have
the same value (2ℓ possibilities). In a column with three active cells, if two of the cells
have valuex and y, the third has valuex+ y and hence it follows thatx̸= y (2ℓ(2ℓ−1)
possibilities). As the number of active cells grows, more cases can be distinguished. In any
case, a pattern can be propagated through the rounds until it has a column with a single
active cell.
This ﬁrst phase can be used to select the rotation distances ofρand theπ permutation.
This allows to reduce all possible values to a reasonably-sized set of candidate parameter
values. For instance, ifρ0 and ρ1 are two rotation distances andρ0 = ρ1, it makes it easier
to remain longer in the kernel: a single orbital in some column will, afterρ◦π, still be a
single orbital. Hence this should be avoided. Similarly, whenρi ̸= ρj but ρi = cρj for all
i,j ∈[0,m −1],i ̸= j where c is some integer, there exist patterns with multiple orbitals
that remain in the kernel after applying the transposition layer.
The obtained bounds of trails in the kernel can then be used in the second phase to
decide on the amount of work one wants to do in the parity folding matrix. A further
selection ofZ candidates can be made by means of a full trail search and diﬀusion criteria
such as the number of rounds to reach full diﬀusion or to meet the (strict) avalanche
criterion.
Finally, the round constants can be designed quasi-independently from the other parts
of the round function, such that various invariant attacks are not a concern [Bei+17].
5.3 Searching linear and diﬀerential trails
Given a candidate design that follows the outlined approach, its resistance against truncated
linear and diﬀerential cryptanalysis should be quantiﬁed by scanning a large search space
of trails. For most ciphers nowadays, this search is performed using Mixed Integer Linear
Programming (MILP). However, recently a very diﬀerent technique was used to ﬁnd
trails for Keccak, which appeared to be quite promising [MDA17]. There, a unique
decomposition of a diﬀerence pattern is deﬁned, allowing a tree-based generation of ‘two-
round trail cores’, where many branches can be pruned and symmetry can be used to skip
over large parts in the search space. We will explain this in more detail.
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 139
We use techniques that are based on that work to ﬁnd trails for our design. However,
to make it work for our design, we have to make a number of modiﬁcations. In this
section we will also highlight the most interesting diﬀerences, that are due to the diﬀerent
dimensions of the states and the choice of a bit-oriented design versus a design with an
almost arbitrary cell sizeℓ.
5.3.1 Trails
A trailQ is a sequence overr rounds. In the case of linear cryptanalysis, it is a sequence
of masks. In the case of diﬀerential cryptanalysis, it is a sequence of diﬀerence patterns.
This section mostly uses the neutral termstate pattern. A cell in a state pattern is called
passive when it is 0 andactive when it is any non-zero value.
We barely distinguish between linear and diﬀerential cryptanalysis, because we have
shown in Section 3 that masks propagate throughθT in the same way that diﬀerences
propagate through θ. Furthermore, the γ step acts as the identity function as it does
not alter the activity of cells: what is active remains active and what is passive remains
passive. The same holds for the addition of round constants. Linear masks also propagate
the same as diﬀerences through row permutations and rotations. This means that the only
diﬀerence between searching truncated diﬀerential and truncated linear trails is that in
diﬀerential trails, forward propagation throughθis governed byZ, and in linear trails
backward propagation throughθis governed byZT.
Because we only consider truncated trails, we only look at cells and not at individual
bits. Theweight W of a trailQis deﬁned asW = ∑r−1
i=0 |qi|, where|qi|denotes the number
of active cells inqi.
5.3.2 Trivial trails in the kernel
The possibility to remain in the kernel leads to some trivial trails. One example of a
starting state pattern is given in Figure 1a, for dimensionsm= 4and n= 16, with two
full rows of active cells. In general, for all dimensions, if the column parity is the all-0
vector, θwill just be the identity function. Furthermore, a transposition layer consisting
of row permutations and rotations will be unable to move the pattern out of the kernel.
This leads to a trivial trail over an arbitrary number of rounds. However, this trail has a
high weight ofW = 2nr active cells.
When Z is circulant, when there is only one full row of active cells and when the
column parity is therefore the all-1 vector,θis the identity function when the number of
aﬀected columns for a single active cell is even. Then there is a trail of weightW = nr
active cells. Recall that a column is aﬀected when its bit in theθ-eﬀect is one. When the
number of aﬀected columns is odd,θwill be the complement function. The trail (with
even length) will then have weightW = nr
2 + (m−1)nr
2 = mnr/2 active cells.
For reasonable dimensions,n is high enough such that these do not pose a problem.
Other state patterns with less active cells might be able to stay in the kernel for one or
two rounds, but the transposition layer should always move them out of the kernel soon.
An example is shown in Figure 1b. This means that the property that a CPM has a kernel
will not pose a serious threat.
5.3.3 Generating two-round trails
In anr-round trail with weightW the average weight per round diﬀerential isW
r and
hence it always contains a round diﬀerential with weightL ≤
⌊W
r
⌋
active cells. When
one wants to ﬁnd allr-round trails up to weightW, one can therefore generate round
diﬀerentials up to weightL and extend all of them forward and backwardr−1 rounds.
However, it was observed in [MDA17] that there are less two-round trail cores with weight
140 Column Parity Mixers
(a) Remains in the kernel indeﬁnitely. (b) Should quickly move out of the kernel.
Figure 1: Examples of state patterns in the kernel.
below 2Lthan diﬀerentials of weight belowL. We therefore generate two-round trail cores
up to weight2L+ 1active cells and extend themr−2 rounds forward and backward.
Similarly to [MDA17], generating the two-round trails is modelled as the traversal of a
tree, where each node represents a pair of state patterns at the input and output ofθ. The
root is formed by the empty state patterns. The idea is that the weight monotonically
increases when visiting a node’s children. Branches where it is known that all descendants
will have a weight higher than2L can then be pruned.
As withKeccak-f, we can uniquely decompose every state pattern into aparity-bare
state and a list offree orbitals. A parity-bare state is a state pattern that does not have free
orbitals. A free orbital is a pair of two active cells in an unaﬀected column, as was already
mentioned in Section 4.1. Removing a free orbital from a state pattern also removes two
active cells afterθ, so adding a free orbital to a state pattern will always increase the
weight of a trail by 4 active cells. This decomposition reduces the problem to that of
generating all parity-bare states in a weight-increasing manner, because we can construct
all states up to some weight2L+ 1by generating all parity-bare states up to that weight
and adding free orbitals to those where there is still budget.
A parity-bare state consists of a list of odd columns, i.e., columns with non-zero parity.
Initially, at the root node, this list is empty. Then one odd column is added to the list.
This means that the children of the root node are all the state patterns with a single odd
column. At every level of the tree, new columns are added.
On top of the tree of parity-bare states, all the nodes also form the root of their own
tree, now maintaining a list of free orbitals, such that at each level free orbitals are added
up to the limit weight. Together, this guarantees that all two-round trails will be found.
Moreover, the rotation-symmetric nature of the state in the horizontal direction and
of all operations allow us to prune many more branches of the trees. There is only need
to considercanonical state patterns, where a state pattern is deﬁned to be canonical if
and only if it is minimal under all horizontal translations given a total ordering over state
patterns. In this case, the total ordering is just the lexicographical ordering on[z,y], where
z is the horizontal axis andy the vertical axis, to keep the notation similar to [MDA17].
The lower left has coordinates(z,y) = (0,0).
5.3.4 Propagation of cells and trail extension
After having generated two-round trail cores, they need to be extended forwards and
backwards byr−2 rounds. With Keccak-f, extension implies that one needs to check
which patterns are compatible trough the nonlinearχ step. Given a non-zero state pattern
at the end of a trail, there are multiple possibilities afterχ and each case needs to be
explored. This branching behaviour causes an exponential increase of the search space
when extending to more rounds.
However, in our case we are considering truncated trails andγhas no eﬀect on state
patterns. This is very diﬀerent from the situation in [MDA17]. Instead, this branching
behaviour is now caused byθ.
To see this, consider a state pattern before and afterθ. Assume a column has≥2
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 141
active cells beforeθ. To applyθ, we start by computing the parity of that column. This
means that we sum over non-zero diﬀerences (in the case of diﬀerential cryptanalysis). It
is possible that this results in a non-zero diﬀerence (i.e. the column is odd), but it is also
possible that the non-zero diﬀerences cancel each other out and the column becomes even.
Both cases should be explored and this causes the search space to branch.
There is another source of branching. We distinguish between four types of columns:
even aﬀected, even unaﬀected, odd aﬀected, and odd unaﬀected.
When a column of the state pattern is unaﬀected,θwill not add anything to the cells in
that column. Therefore, cells that were active beforeθwill remain active afterθ. Passive
cells will also remain passive. We therefore only need to consider aﬀected columns. In
aﬀected columns, every cell that is passive beforeθbecomes active afterθ, as a non-zero
diﬀerence is added to a diﬀerence of zero in the case of diﬀerential trails. However, if a cell
is active cell beforeθ, it is unknown whether it will remain active or will cancel out afterθ,
as some non-zero diﬀerence is added to some non-zero diﬀerence. A search for truncated
trails would need to consider both cases for all active cells in aﬀected columns.
However, one can do slightly better. How an active cell propagates depends on the
number of active cells in that column. As an example, let#x denote the number of active
cells in columnx(and letm≥4). We will make a case distinction on whetherxis even or
odd, and on#x, up to#x = 4.
#x = 0, x even. Nothing can cancel out. Of course, all cells become active (with the
same diﬀerence value) afterθ.
#x = 0, x odd. Impossible.
#x = 1, x even. Impossible.
#x = 1, x odd. That active cell may cancel out or not afterθ.
#x = 2, x even. This can only happen when the two active cells have the same diﬀerence
value. Whenxis aﬀected, the two active cells either both cancel out afterθ, or none
of them, but never only one.
#x = 2, x odd. This can only happen when the two active cells have a diﬀerent diﬀerence
value. Therefore, either no active cells cancel out afterθ, or one of them, but never
both.
#x = 3, x even. This can only happen when all three active cells are diﬀerent. At most
one of the active cells cancels out afterθ.
#x = 3, x odd. Now there are more possibilities. The active cells can be all the same,
all diﬀerent, or can consist of one pair and one other value. This implies that any in
{0,1,2,3}active cells cancel out afterθ.
#x = 4, x even. The active cells are all the same, all diﬀerent, or consist of two pairs.
So any in{0,1,2,4}active cells cancel out afterθ.
#x = 4, x odd. All combinations are possible, except that all active cells have the same
diﬀerence value. Therefore any in{0,1,2,3}active cells may cancel out afterθ.
This can be extended further to higher values for#x, but the relative amount of cases
that can be skipped will then decrease. It is clear that the search space of diﬀerential trails
branches heavily with a CPM.
We wrote dedicated software to traverse the search space of truncated linear and
diﬀerential trails for designs following our approach. The software is freely available at
https://github.com/Ko-/cpm.
142 Column Parity Mixers
6 The Mixifer permutation
6.1 Design goals
To show an instance of this design strategy, in this section we introduce a concrete
permutation and study its security and eﬃciency. We aim for a suitable permutation for
lightweight applications, such as in the Internet of Things. In this case, with ‘lightweight’
we mean that it should be fast in constant-time code for microcontrollers such as the ARM
Cortex-M series and that it should require little area in ASICs.
This could be used in a simple (single-key) Even-Mansour construction [EM93] to build
a block cipher or in a construction such as XPX [Men16] to build a tweakable block cipher.
Based on this, one could even build other primitives such as authenticated encryption.
Depending on the mode, we may or may not need the inverse permutation. To make the
permutation more ﬂexible, we therefore require that the inverse also needs to be eﬃcient.
For eﬃcient full-width processing in software, we would like a state size that is a power
of two. A potential problem with a state sizeb of 128 bits is that this gives a birthday
bound of only 64 bits, which may or may not be an issue depending on the mode in which
this permutation is to be used. Again, we design this permutation to be useful in many
scenarios, which is why we choose our state size to be equal to the next power of two,
b= 256bits. This gives a birthday bound of 128 bits, which should be more than enough.
To achieve fast constant-time code, we aim for a round function that can be eﬃciently
implemented with bitwise Boolean instructions and cyclic shifts. This has implications for
the way we arrange the bits of the cells in CPU words.
6.2 The construction
First we have to selectℓ, m and n. To have an eﬃcient inverse ofθ, we choosen to be
even, such thatθbecomes an involution. For an eﬃcient bitsliced implementation ofγ,
we chooseℓ= 4. Now both 8 rows and 8 columns, and 4 rows and 16 columns are viable
options. We set m = 4 and n = 16, based on the trivial in-kernel trails discussed in
Section 5.3.2.
For γ, applying a 4-bit S-box to every nibble separately can quickly become expensive.
We make sure that, in software, the S-box can be applied eﬃciently on a full row, without
using lookup tables or other operations that might lead to timing attacks. We suggest a
bitsliced state representation and explore one such possibility in Section 6.5. This works
when the S-box is rotation-symmetric.
An ℓ-bit S-boxS : GF(2ℓ) → GF(2ℓ) is rotation-symmetric if and only ifS(a≫d) =
S(a) ≫d for alla∈GF(2ℓ), d∈[0,ℓ−1], where≫denotes bitwise rotation. Properties
of rotation-symmetric S-boxes (RSSBs) have been explored in, e.g., [RBG08] and [Kav12].
Rotation-symmetric S-boxes are determined by a single coordinate function. There
are therefore only224
4-bit rotation-symmetric functions, which makes them eﬃciently
enumerable. We search exhaustively through these candidate S-boxes to ﬁnd an example
with nice cryptographic properties and that also has an eﬃcient implementation. Out of
the 65536 functions, 1536 are invertible. Of course, many are linear and/or aﬃne equivalent
to each other [LP07]. Out of these 1536 candidates, 512 are ‘optimal’ S-boxes, as deﬁned
in [LP07]. This means that they have a maximum diﬀerential probability of1/4 and a
maximum input-output correlation of1/2. All of these have 3 as their algebraic degree.
We then selected the S-box based on the number of binary Boolean operations that are
required to compute it and its inverse. It can be deﬁned in algebraic normal form by the
coordinate functionb0 = a1 + a2 + a0a2 + a1a2 + a1a2a3. More details and representations
can be found in Appendix A.
For the ﬁrst phase of selectingθ, π, andρ, we consider trails in the kernel ofθ. Because
of all the symmetry, we can arbitrarily set one rotation distance to zero, shaving oﬀ a few
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 143
more operations. After some experiments, we setπ to be the permutation that rotates
all rows down.ρrotates rows nibble-wise to the right by the distances 14, 3, 10, and 0,
respectively, from top to bottom. This yielded a best trail with a weight of 52 active cells
over 4 rounds. For implementation eﬃciency, we also makeρcompute an ‘intra-nibble’
rotation to the left for all nibbles that are wrapped to the other side. In Section 6.5 it will
become clear why this ‘extra’ work is actually more eﬃcient and not less. Note that this
does not aﬀect our truncated trail search.
For the second phase, the parity-folding matrixZ should be chosen such that the
truncated trail search yields bounds that are not much better than the in-kernel trails. We
end up with a circulant matrix where a column can aﬀect three other columns. Over 4
rounds, the best diﬀerential trail then has a weight of 46 active cells
The steps of the round function have high symmetry. All fourγ, θ, π, and ρ are
invariant to rotation along the rows and rotation of bits within the cells. Moreover,γand
θare even invariant in rotation along the columns. We therefore add round constants,
that should achieve the following goals:
1. Applying a few rounds to a state that has some symmetryA⊕(A≫d) = 0shall
result in a stateB where B⊕(B ≫d) has high Hamming weight, for all values ofd.
2. Applying a few rounds to two statesA and A∗with A′= A⊕A∗and A′⊕(A′≫
d) = 0shall result in a diﬀerenceB′where B′⊕(B′≫d) has high Hamming weight,
for all values ofd.
3. There shall be no invariant subspaces in the linear part of the round function,
including the addition of the round constant.
4. Round constant addition shall be cheap.
The minimum cost of round constant addition is a single bitwise addition per round.
Therefore, we have round constants that are non-zero in a single word. We choose the
word that contains the nibbles of the top row in even positions. We use a simple scheme
to achieve asymmetry: all round constants are obtained by performing a (non-cyclic) shift
of a single master round constant, where the shift oﬀset is simply the round index. We
believe criteria 1 and 2 listed above are satisﬁed for the following reasons. First, the round
constants are outside the kernel and hence their inﬂuence will spread very quickly. Second,
they do not have symmetry along the rows or within the nibbles.
As for criterion 3, we investigated the algebraic properties of the linear part of the round
function, as explained in [Bei+17]. It can be seen as 4 identical mappings, each operating
on the bits in a speciﬁc position of the nibbles. So each one operates on a matrix of 4 rows
and 16 columns. The characteristic polynomial of this mapping is1 +x64 = (1 +x)64.
This suggests that it has non-trivial invariant subspaces of dimension 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32.
These are easy to ﬁnd, knowing the symmetry. The ones of dimension above 2 simply
consist of states that have periodic rows. The subspace of dimension 32 is the set of all
states with period 8, dimension 16 with period 4, dimension 8 with period 2 and dimension
4 with period 1 (rows are all-1 or all-0). The subspace with dimension 2 are the 4 states
with an even number of all-1 states and an even number of all-0 rows. Finally, the subspace
with dimension 1 are the all-0 and the all-1 state.
The 32 active bits in the round constants are spread evenly over these 4 mappings. It
would be problematic if the diﬀerences between the round constants were all periodic. We
made sure that this is not the case.
The master round constant has the following value expressed as a bit sequence:
11000110111010100001001011001111, starting with the least signiﬁcant bit. This has
been generated with the 5-bit LFSR with feedback polynomial1 +x3 + x5. While there are
linear recurrences among bits due to a short LFSR, this has no relation with the symmetry
in the steps of the round function and we therefore believe that this is not a problem.
144 Column Parity Mixers
A
⊕
1T4A eZ(A)
θ(A)
⊕
Figure 2: The diﬀusion layerθ.
π ρ
Figure 3: The transposition layerρ◦π.
The round constant for roundi is this sequence shifted to the left byi bits.
Summary. To summarize this and to make this more precise, we introduce a 256-bit
iterated permutation called Mixifer. Mixifer consists of 16 rounds. The 256-bit state is
arranged asm= 4rows withn= 16columns of 4-bit nibbles. Every round consists of
applying ι◦ρ◦π◦θ◦γ.
•γis a non-linear mapping, the S-box. It is a 4-bit S-box that is applied to each nibble.
We choose the rotational symmetric S-box deﬁned by the following equation (over
GF(2)) for the ﬁrst coordinate:b0 = a1 + a2 + a0a2 + a1a2 + a1a2a3. Appendix A
provides other descriptions of this S-box and its inverse.
•θis our column parity mixer, deﬁned by dimensionsm = 4, n = 16, and by the
following circulant parity-folding matrixZ:
Z =

]]]]]]]
0 1 1 0 0 1 0 0 ···0
0 0 1 1 0 0 1 0 ···0
0 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 ···0
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 ···1
1 1 0 0 1 0 0 0 ···0

[
.
Alternatively, the parity-folding polynomial isz(x) =x+ x2 + x5.
•π permutes the rows as follows:0 ↦→1,1 ↦→2,2 ↦→3,3 ↦→0, where{0,1,2,3}are
row indices, starting from the top.
•ρ rotates the 4 rows nibble-wise to the right by the distances 14, 3, 10, and 0,
respectively, from top to bottom. Additionally, all the nibbles that are wrapped to
the other side are rotated to the left by 1 bit within that nibble.
•ιadds a round constant into the even cells of the top row, starting to count at 0,
as highlighted in Figure 4. In roundi this is0xF3485763 shifted to the right byi,
again starting to count at 0.
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 145
Figure 4: Locations whereιadds the round constant.
6.3 Evaluation
6.3.1 Avalanche eﬀect
We ﬁrst study the diﬀusion of our CPM by considering the avalanche eﬀect for Mixifer.
Good diﬀusion implies that a single bit will quickly aﬀect as many other bits as possible.
Avalanche testing is a quick and easy test to quantify how quickly diﬀusion takes place.
For each of the 256 bits, we generate 10000 random states. A round-reduced Mixifer is
then applied to that state and to that state where one bit is ﬂipped. Each time, we look at
the diﬀerences between the outputs. We consider the amount of bits that are ﬂipped, but
also in how many diﬀerent cells bits are ﬂipped. It can be seen in Table 2 that a single
bit ﬂip in a random state has very rapid diﬀusion. Already after 3 rounds, each bit of
the output is ﬂipped with 50.0% probability. This is also known as the strict avalanche
criterion.
Table 2:Avalanche test ﬂipping a single bit.
Rounds 1 2 3
Average bit ﬂip probability 10.2% 47.1% 50.0%
Average cell change probability 20.2% 88.83% 93.8%
Worst-case bits ﬂipped 13 44 89
Worst-case cells changed 13 32 48
Another way to test the avalanche eﬀect is by starting with a state where only a single
bit is set, and to measure how many rounds it takes before every bit in the state is touched.
Typically, operations can be changed toORs and it can be checked when all bits in the
state are set. The results are listed in Table 3. After 5 rounds, ’full’ diﬀusion is achieved
from every starting bit.
Table 3:Avalanche test starting with single bit set.
Rounds 1 2 3 4 5
Worst-case bits set 71 196 243 255 256
Worst-case cells set 25 58 63 64 64
6.3.2 Linear and diﬀerential cryptanalysis
A strategy for searching truncated linear and diﬀerential trails has been outlined in
Section 5.3. Here, we only summarize the trails and bounds that we computed for Mixifer.
First it should be veriﬁed that the kernel of the CPM does not pose a serious concern
and that it is infeasible to stay in the kernel for many consecutive rounds, except for trivial
trails where two full rows are active, as was discussed in Section 5.3.2. We generated trails
where the state pattern remains in the kernel until the last round. The number of active
146 Column Parity Mixers
cells per state pattern in the trail is therefore constant. Table 4 summarizes the bounds,
while Appendix C contains the actual trails.
Table 4:Minimum weight for trails that remain in the kernel until the last round.
Number of roundsr 2 3 4
Minimum W active cells 4 18 52
Outside of the kernel, we ﬁrst use our software to generate two-round trails. Figure 5
shows the number of two-round diﬀerential trails that need to be considered and their
weights.
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28
101
103
105
107
109
W
Number of trails
Figure 5: Number of active cells of two-round diﬀerential trails.
After extending these two-round trails, we ﬁnd the minimum weight trails for three
and four rounds, both for linear and for diﬀerential trails. For three rounds, both the best
linear and the best diﬀerential trail have a weight of 27 active cells. Table 5 shows the
overall minimum weights (combing trails in the kernel and outside the kernel), while the
trails themselves can be found in Appendix C. It can be seen that after four rounds, the
trails in the kernel are no longer the minimum weight trails. We expect the weight to
again increase signiﬁcantly for subsequent rounds, but we were not able to cover the full
search space anymore.
Table 5:Minimum weight in number of active cells for trails.
Number of roundsr 1 2 3 4
Minimum W diﬀerential 1 4 18 46
Minimum W linear 1 4 18 40
6.3.3 Clustering of diﬀerential trails
So far we have considered truncated trails. However, as the round function is cell-oriented,
there may be signiﬁcant cases of trail clustering. In particular, there may be multi-round
diﬀerentials with many diﬀerential trails in the same truncated diﬀerential trail.
For two-round AES, this was investigated in [DR06] and it turned out that the two-round
diﬀerential over two rounds has a maximum diﬀerential probability (DP) of13.25 ×2−32,
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 147
while the best two-round trail has DP4 ×2−32. The diﬀerential is the result of 75 trails, all
in the same truncated trail. These investigations were done on an interesting sub-structure
of AES, the so-calledAES super-box. This structure is a permutation operating on a 4-byte
array and consists of the SubBytes S-box layer, MixColumns, round key addition, and
again a SubBytes S-box layer, all restricted to a 4-byte array. The best diﬀerentials over
that structure have in total 5 active S-boxes over the two SubBytes layers and those are
the ones that are investigated.
For Mixifer, we analyze an analogous case, namely the best diﬀerential trails over two
rounds. Those are the ones with two active cells that form an orbital inθof the ﬁrst
round. So we have two nibbles in the same column with diﬀerence valuesd0 and d1 at
the input ofγ, that maps them both to the same diﬀerenced∆ . The subsequentθacts as
the identity andρand π move them to diﬀerent positions before they arrive at the nextγ
layer. There, the two active nibbles map to output diﬀerencesd2 and d3. The remainder of
the second round does not modify the diﬀerential probability. So the super-box structure
we consider consists of twoγ S-boxes, followed by twoγ S-boxes. There is no mapping in
between, only the requirement that in the intermediate diﬀerence the two active cells are
equal. So the trails look like this:(d0,d1)
γ
→ (d∆ ,d∆ )
γ
→ (d2,d3). This means that their
diﬀerential probability isDP(d0,d∆ )DP(d1,d∆ )DP(d∆ ,d2)DP(d∆ ,d3). They contribute
to the super-box diﬀerential in the following way:
DP((d0,d1) → (d2,d3)) =

d∆
DP(d0,d∆ )DP(d1,d∆ )DP(d∆ ,d2)DP(d∆ ,d3) .
A single trail can have DP at most2−8, as the maximum DP of our S-box is2−2. We have
exhaustively checked for all216 possible combinations of(d0,d1,d2,d3), and the diﬀerential
with the highest DP turned out to be the one where alldi are all-1 (soF in hexadecimal).
It has DP2−8 + 6×2−12 that is the contribution of 7 trails, one dominant with DP2−8
and 6 with DP each2−12. This gives a DP for the diﬀerential that is only a factor1.375
higher than that of its dominating trail.
As a preliminary conclusion, it appears that the eﬀect of clustering appears to be
smaller than for AES.
6.3.4 Impossible diﬀerential cryptanalysis
It is well-known that every permutation has many impossible diﬀerentials [BBS05]. For
any input diﬀerence, there are exactly2b−1 pairs and hence there can be only2b−1 output
diﬀerences. However, to the best of our knowledge no attacks have been reported that
exploit that aspect. Impossible diﬀerential attacks exploit large classes of impossible
diﬀerentials, i.e. diﬀerentials with zero probability. Here we will discuss whether this can
be applied to Mixifer.
Let us consider a single-cell diﬀerence at the input of a round (calledﬁrst round):
•First round:θmaps the single active cell to a diﬀerence with three additional aﬀected
columns and the subsequentρmoves the active cells to diﬀerent columns.
•Second round: γ transforms the diﬀerence values of the 13 active cells to possibly
diﬀerent values. The subsequentθadds aﬀected columns. We found that at this
stage, all columns can be aﬀected. The subsequentρand π steps just move the
active cells around.
•Third round:γtransforms the diﬀerence values of the active cells to possibly diﬀerent
values. Within each column, all possibilities can occur: in the kernel or out of the
kernel, all four the same4, three the same3 + 1, 2 + 2, 2 + 1 + 1and all four diﬀerent
1 + 1 + 1 + 1. The subsequentθcomputes column parities over all columns and adds
148 Column Parity Mixers
three aﬀected columns for each one. This leads to a state where each cell can be
active or passive, with the exception of an all-passive state. This remains to be the
case afterρand π.
So a diﬀerence with a single active cell may lead to any (non-zero) truncated diﬀerence after
three rounds. If we consider fully speciﬁed patterns taking into account the cell diﬀerence
values, we have veriﬁed that, when we apply a diﬀerenceato the serial composition of two
S-boxes with the addition of an oﬀset in between, that this may lead to all possible non-zero
diﬀerences for any non-zero valuea. So, even though for any stage of the computation
there will certainly exist (non-truncated) diﬀerence patterns that cannot occur, afterχ of
the fourth round, it will be very hard to exploit them.
We treated the case of a diﬀerence pattern with a single active cell. If there is more
than one active cell, one may try to slow down diﬀusion by having the pattern at the input
of θof the ﬁrst round in the kernel. In that case, one would apply a pattern at the input
consisting of one or more orbitals. However, afterγof the ﬁrst round, the diﬀerence values
of the active cells belonging to the same orbital depend on the absolute value of the state,
and hence they are only equal in a subset of all cases. So for the other cases that may
occur and are hence not impossible, there are actually more active cells present afterθ
and hence diﬀusion is even faster.
We see that Mixifer has no exploitable impossible diﬀerentials that start from a single-
cell diﬀerence over more than 3 rounds. This is actually as good as AES despite the larger
number of cells, and we attribute it to the large average diﬀusion of the column parity
mixer that we use.
6.3.5 Invariant attacks
Under invariant attacks, we consider rotational cryptanalysis [KN10], slide attacks [BW99],
invariant subspace attacks [Lea+11], and nonlinear invariant attacks [TLS16]. One property
that these attacks share, is that they can be defeated by appropriately choosing round
constants [Bei+17].
We explicitly designed our round constants to fulﬁll all the relevant criteria, which is
why we conclude that there are no exploitable invariant attacks against Mixifer.
6.4 The number of rounds
Recall that we aim for use cases such as XPX [Men16], where an adversary can apply
diﬀerence patterns across the complete input and can do inverse permutation queries, and
that we target a security level of 128 bits. Note that this is diﬀerent than for block ciphers
where by default a security level equal to the block length is claimed, leading to the absurd
situation that attacks requiring an adversary to query almost the full codebook canbreak
a cipher, at least from an academic perspective. Our security claim is compatible with
the fact that most modes do not achieve security above the birthday bound, that is at a
comfortable 128 bits for our permutation width.
Based on our investigations, we ﬁx the number of rounds to 16 and believe this gives a
comfortable safety margin for the following reasons:
•The best diﬀerential trails over 4 rounds have DP2−92, so the best ones over 12
rounds have an approximated DP of2−276. In our best 2-round diﬀerential trail,
the DP is2−8, while the best 2-round diﬀerential has DP1.375 ×2−8 ≈2−7.54. So
clustering may lead to some loss, but even dividing the exponent of the best trail
DP by two would give2−138, an unexploitable value.
•For linear trails we have a maximum linear probability (square of the correlation) over
4 rounds of2−80, resulting in2−240 over 12 rounds. This is slightly less comfortable
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 149
than the case of diﬀerential trails, but it is still very large, even if a huge degeneration
due to clustering would occur.
•The number of rounds for which structural attacks, such as integral cryptanalysis
and impossible diﬀerentials, still work, is strongly correlated with the number of
rounds that it takes to achieve full diﬀusion. We have illustrated this explicitly with
impossible diﬀerentials. Speciﬁcally, we claim that despite its larger state and more
lightweight round function, Mixifer achieves full diﬀusion about as fast as AES.
•The algebraic degree of the round function is 3, as is that of its inverse. This already
starts saturating after5 rounds, so we don’t expect there to be any problems.
Of course every concrete cipher can only be considered secure after intensive public scrutiny
so we invite all members of the cryptographic community to attack Mixifer.
6.5 Implementation cost
Mixifer is designed for eﬃcient constant-time implementations in hardware and in software
on 32-bit and 64-bit architectures. We provide two reference implementations in C
and an optimized assembly implementation for the (32-bit) ARM Cortex-M3 and M4
microcontrollers.
The ﬁrst C implementation uses 4uint64_ts to represent the state and implements
the round function in a very straightforward way. In a naive software implementation
like this,γcan be relatively computationally expensive. The S-box needs to be computed
for each cell individually. Even when one applies the S-box to an entire row in parallel,
bitmasks are typically required to separate the four bits of a cell over separate registers.
By selecting a rotation-symmetric S-box and assuming a bitsliced state, this can be made
more eﬃcient, especially on architectures such as those by ARM where shifts and rotations
are cheap. After loading our state, we take it to be organized as in Figure 6.
The ith byte of a 32-bit word stores theith bit for 8 cells, as the S-box can then be
computed in just 4 instructions per register. We also choose to interleave adjacent cells
over two words, as a word-rotation by one nibble is now only a bytewise rotation by one
bit and a swap of registers, which is free, instead of having to do this bytewise rotation on
two words. The second C implementation uses this approach and represents the state with
8 uint32_ts.
16 columns1 cell
4 rows
r0
r1
r2
r3
r4
r5
r6
r7
Figure 6: Bitsliced representation for 32-bit architectures. At the top is the 256-bits
state, where every rectangle is a bit. At the bottom are 8 32-bit registers labeledr0 to r7,
where every colored rectangle is a byte.
On the ARM Cortex-M3 or M4, we can computeγ with this representation in 32
single-cycle instructions. On a 64-bit architecture, this could naturally be twice as eﬃcient.
150 Column Parity Mixers
Computing θtakes 6 cycles for computing the parity, 17 cycles for calculating the eﬀect,
and 8 cycles for adding it back to the state.π can be implemented by just renaming
registers, andρtakes us 2 cycles per row, except for the last row which is not rotated, so
only 6 cycles in total.ιtakes a single cycle.
All combined, our optimized assembly implementations needs 70 cycles for a single
round. Together with some overhead for a function call and for loading and storing data,
the full unrolled 16-round permutation runs in 1174 cycles, or 36.69 cycles per byte on the
ARM Cortex-M4, as measured on an STM32F407 microcontroller. For ARM Cortex-M3,
we measure 1175 cycles on an STM32L100 microcontroller. The implementation uses only
44 bytes on the stack, excluding the input. They are mostly to store callee-save registers.
Notably, the inverse permutation has the same memory requirements and even a slightly
higher speed, measuring 1126 cycles on the STM32F407.
All source code is put in the public domain and available athttps://github.com/
Ko-/mixifer.
6.6 Comparing to other ciphers
To put our bounds and benchmarks into context, we compare the results to some other
permutations and ciphers. We aim to make this comparison fair by only considering
schemes for which there is an optimized implementation for the ARM Cortex-M3 or M4.
Aside from the usual speed and size numbers, we would also like to somehow incorporate
the ‘quality’ of a round function into the comparison.
Some schemes have many lightweight rounds while others have more computationally
demanding rounds, but need less of them to reach a certain level of security. Some schemes
are also more conservative than others with regard to the number of rounds compared
to the best known attacks. Moreover, schemes target diﬀerent security levels. All of that
makes it hard to quantify the notion of the quality of a round function in a meaningful
way. Intuitively, however, we believe that it would be interesting to look at the amount of
‘security’ that is gained per amount of ‘work’ that has to be done.
Table 6 lists some of the results. Regarding ‘security’, we consider the weight that a
single round adds to the best known diﬀerential trail. In the table, the weight is expressed
as the−log of the maximum diﬀerential probability (DP). ’Work’ is then quantiﬁed as
the number of cycles per byte per round on these Cortex-M microarchitectures. Of course
these numbers do not reﬂect security against diﬀerent types of attacks, performance on
diﬀerent architectures, the security margin, and so on.
AES [DR02] is a prime example of a cipher using an MDS matrix and with strong
bounds. For fair comparison, we also mention performance numbers for a bitsliced
implementation that does not use any secret-data dependent lookup tables and is not
vulnerable to cache attacks. Gimli [Ber+17] is a 384-bit permutation with a much lighter
round function which shows in its speed, but also in the best known trails. We compare to
Salsa20/20 [Ber08b] because it is known for being very fast. The speed that is mentioned,
is actually that of ChaCha20 [Ber08a], which has comparable speed. However, to the best
of our knowledge, no bounds are known for ChaCha20 and Salsa20/20 does not have an
optimized implementation for the Cortex-M3 and M4. We compare toKeccak-f[400] and
Keccak-f[800] [Ber+11b] because they are known to have very strong security guarantees
against linear and diﬀerential cryptanalysis in the form of a good bound on the weight of
trails [MDA17]. The big gap in performance is becauseKeccak-f[800] is the smallest
Keccak-f that can fully use 32-bit registers.
It is clear that Mixifer may not be as fast as Salsa20/20 or Gimli, but their currently
available bounds leave something to be desired, although they may improve in the future.
When one considers the amount of ‘security’ that one gets per amount of ‘work’ that needs
to be done, Mixifer stands out.
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 151
Table 6:Comparison of performance on the Cortex-M3/M4 and bounds.
Name Width r Speed (cycles/byte) Bound trails
(bits) Full / r r −log(max DP) /r
AES bitsliced 128 10 50.52 [SS16] 5.05 4 150 [DR02] 37.5
AES tables 39.97 [SS16] 4.00
Gimli 384 24 21.81 [Ber+17] 0.91 8 52 [Ber+17] 6.5
Keccak-f[400] 400 20 106 [Ber+14] 5.3 6 92 [MDA17] 15.3
Keccak-f[800] 800 22 48.02 [Ber+14] 2.18 6 92 [MDA17] 15.3
Salsa20/20 512 20 13.88 [HRS16] 0.69 3 18 [MP13] 6
Mixifer 256 16 36.69 2.33 4 92 23
7 Conclusions and future work
We have generalized the mixing layer of the permutation ofKeccak and showed that
column parity mixers are an interesting alternative to MDS matrices. They can be very
lightweight mixing layers and they lend themselves well to bitsliced implementations, even
for nibble-oriented ciphers and permutations. Additionally, we formulated a strategy to
obtain strong bounds with respect to truncated linear and diﬀerential cryptanalysis and
demonstrated its eﬀectiveness by an example.
CPMs look promising, but there are still some interesting aspects that are worth
investigating. For instance, intuitively it makes sense that a sparser parity-folding matrix
means less diﬀusion and a cheaper implementation, but it is less obvious what would be
an ideal trade-oﬀ and how this relates to the trail search space that needs to be covered.
One can imagine that after some point, there is not so much to be gained by making a
parity-folding matrix denser, especially when considering trails over many rounds.
For circulant parity-folding matrices, there exist interesting patterns after one selects
which columns should be aﬀected given a single isolated active cell. For example, consider
the case wherez(x) =x+ x2 + x3 + x4. Then a single active cell leads to four aﬀected
columns. However, with two active cells in adjacent columns, there would be some
destructive interference in theθ-eﬀect leading to only two aﬀected columns. In general,
something similar can happen with other parity-folding matrices and multiple odd columns.
It is worth investigating what is an optimal choice.
As another example, it would be interesting to know whether there exist better
transposition layers than a combination of row permutations and rotations. Or, to learn
what is the optimal ratio betweenℓ, m, andn.
For Mixifer, we considered truncated trails and while we touched upon the subject of
trail clustering, more can be done. It would be interesting to investigate this behaviour
for more rounds, both for AES and for MDS-based ciphers in general, as for Mixifer. We
consider further research on clustering of trails to be future work.
We are looking forward to see any future work on the subject of column-parity mixers.
References
[77] Data Encryption Standard. National Bureau of Standards, NBS FIPS PUB
46, U.S. Department of Commerce. Jan. 1977.
[Alb+14] Martin R. Albrecht, Benedikt Driessen, Elif Bilge Kavun, Gregor Leander,
Christof Paar, and Tolga Yalçin. “Block Ciphers - Focus on the Linear Layer
(feat. PRIDE)”. In:CRYPTO 2014, Part I. Ed. by Juan A. Garay and Rosario
152 Column Parity Mixers
Gennaro. Vol. 8616. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 2014, pp. 57–76.doi:
10.1007/978-3-662-44371-2_4 .
[Ban+15] SubhadeepBanik,AndreyBogdanov,TakanoriIsobe,KyojiShibutani,Harunaga
Hiwatari, Toru Akishita, and Francesco Regazzoni. “Midori: A Block Cipher
for Low Energy”. In:ASIACRYPT 2015, Part II. Ed. by Tetsu Iwata and
Jung Hee Cheon. Vol. 9453. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Nov. 2015, pp. 411–
436. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-48800-3_17 .
[BBS05] Eli Biham, Alex Biryukov, and Adi Shamir. “Cryptanalysis of Skipjack Re-
duced to 31 Rounds Using Impossible Diﬀerentials”. In:Journal of Cryptology
18.4 (Sept. 2005), pp. 291–311.doi: 10.1007/s00145-005-0129-3 .
[Bei+16] Christof Beierle, Jérémy Jean, Stefan Kölbl, Gregor Leander, Amir Moradi,
Thomas Peyrin, Yu Sasaki, Pascal Sasdrich, and Siang Meng Sim. “The
SKINNY Family of Block Ciphers and Its Low-Latency Variant MANTIS”.
In: CRYPTO 2016, Part II. Ed. by Matthew Robshaw and Jonathan Katz.
Vol. 9815. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 2016, pp. 123–153.doi: 10.1007/
978-3-662-53008-5_5 .
[Bei+17] Christof Beierle, Anne Canteaut, Gregor Leander, and Yann Rotella. “Proving
Resistance Against Invariant Attacks: How to Choose the Round Constants”.
In: CRYPTO 2017, Part II. Ed. by Jonathan Katz and Hovav Shacham.
Vol. 10402. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 2017, pp. 647–678.doi: 10.
1007/978-3-319-63715-0_22 .
[Ber+11a] Guido Bertoni, Joan Daemen, Michaël Peeters, and Gilles Van Assche.Crypto-
graphic sponge functions. Jan. 2011.url: https://keccak.team/files/CSF-
0.1.pdf.
[Ber+11b] Guido Bertoni, Joan Daemen, Michaël Peeters, and Gilles Van Assche.The
Keccak reference. Jan. 2011.url: http://keccak.noekeon.org/.
[Ber+14] Guido Bertoni, Joan Daemen, Michaël Peeters, Gilles Van Assche, and Ronny
Van Keer. Keccak code package. Oct. 2014. url: https : / / github . com /
gvanas/KeccakCodePackage.
[Ber+17] Daniel J. Bernstein, Stefan Kölbl, Stefan Lucks, Pedro Maat Costa Massolino,
Florian Mendel, Kashif Nawaz, Tobias Schneider, Peter Schwabe, François-
Xavier Standaert, Yosuke Todo, and Benoît Viguier. “Gimli : A Cross-Platform
Permutation”. In:CHES 2017. Ed. by Wieland Fischer and Naofumi Homma.
Vol. 10529. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Sept. 2017, pp. 299–320.doi: 10.
1007/978-3-319-66787-4_15 .
[Ber08a] Daniel J. Bernstein. “ChaCha, a variant of Salsa20”. In:Workshop Record of
SASC. 2008.url: http://cr.yp.to/chacha/chacha-20080120.pdf.
[Ber08b] Daniel J. Bernstein. “The Salsa20 Family of Stream Ciphers”. In:New Stream
Cipher Designs: The eSTREAM Finalists. Ed. by Matthew Robshaw and
Olivier Billet. Vol. 4986. LNCS. Springer, 2008, pp. 84–97.isbn: 978-3-540-
68351-3. doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-68351-3_8 .
[BKL16] Christof Beierle, Thorsten Kranz, and Gregor Leander. “Lightweight Multipli-
cation inGF(2n) with Applications to MDS Matrices”. In:CRYPTO 2016,
Part I. Ed. by Matthew Robshaw and Jonathan Katz. Vol. 9814. LNCS.
Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 2016, pp. 625–653.doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-
53018-4_23.
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 153
[Bor+12] Julia Borghoﬀ, Anne Canteaut, Tim Güneysu, Elif Bilge Kavun, Miroslav
Knežević, Lars R. Knudsen, Gregor Leander, Ventzislav Nikov, Christof Paar,
Christian Rechberger, Peter Rombouts, Søren S. Thomsen, and Tolga Yalçin.
“PRINCE-ALow-LatencyBlockCipherforPervasiveComputingApplications
- Extended Abstract”. In:ASIACRYPT 2012. Ed. by Xiaoyun Wang and
Kazue Sako. Vol. 7658. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Dec. 2012, pp. 208–225.
doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-34961-4_14 .
[BW99] Alex Biryukov and David Wagner. “Slide Attacks”. In:FSE’99. Ed. by Lars R.
Knudsen. Vol. 1636. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Mar. 1999, pp. 245–259.
doi: 10.1007/3-540-48519-8_18 .
[DF04] David S. Dummit and Richard M. Foote.Abstract algebra. John Wiley and
Sons, Inc., 2004.
[DGV93] Joan Daemen, René Govaerts, and Joos Vandewalle. “Block Ciphers Based on
Modular Arithmetic”. In:Proceedings of the 3rd Symposium on the State and
Progress of Research in Cryptography. Ed. by W. Wolfowicz. 1993, pp. 80–89.
[DR02] Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen. The design of Rijndael – AES, The
Advanced Encryption Standard. Springer, 2002.url: http://jda.noekeon.
org/JDA_VRI_Rijndael_2002.pdf.
[DR06] Joan Daemen and Vincent Rijmen. “Understanding Two-Round Diﬀerentials in
AES”. In:SCN 06. Ed. by Roberto De Prisco and Moti Yung. Vol. 4116. LNCS.
Springer, Heidelberg, Sept. 2006, pp. 78–94.doi: 10.1007/11832072_6.
[EM93] Shimon Even and Yishay Mansour. “A Construction of a Cipher From a Single
Pseudorandom Permutation”. In:ASIACRYPT’91. Ed. by Hideki Imai, Ronald
L. Rivest, and Tsutomu Matsumoto. Vol. 739. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg,
Nov. 1993, pp. 210–224.doi: 10.1007/3-540-57332-1_17 .
[GPP11] Jian Guo, Thomas Peyrin, and Axel Poschmann. “The PHOTON Family of
Lightweight Hash Functions”. In:CRYPTO 2011. Ed. by Phillip Rogaway.
Vol. 6841. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 2011, pp. 222–239.doi: 10.1007/
978-3-642-22792-9_13 .
[Guo+11] Jian Guo, Thomas Peyrin, Axel Poschmann, and Matthew J. B. Robshaw.
“The LED Block Cipher”. In:CHES 2011. Ed. by Bart Preneel and Tsuyoshi
Takagi. Vol. 6917. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Sept. 2011, pp. 326–341.doi:
10.1007/978-3-642-23951-9_22 .
[HRS16] Andreas Hülsing, Joost Rijneveld, and Peter Schwabe. “ARMed SPHINCS
- Computing a 41 KB Signature in 16 KB of RAM”. In:PKC 2016, Part I.
Ed. by Chen-Mou Cheng, Kai-Min Chung, Giuseppe Persiano, and Bo-Yin
Yang. Vol. 9614. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Mar. 2016, pp. 446–470.doi:
10.1007/978-3-662-49384-7_17 .
[JNP15] Jérémy Jean, Ivica Nikolić, and Thomas Peyrin.Joltik v1.3. Submission to
the CAESAR submission. Aug. 2015.url: http://www1.spms.ntu.edu.sg/
~syllab/m/images/c/ca/V1.3_Joltik.pdf.
[Kav+14] Elif Bilge Kavun, Martin M. Lauridsen, Gregor Leander, Christian Rechberger,
Peter Schwabe, and Tolga Yalçın.Prøst v1.1. Submission to the CAESAR com-
petition. 2014.url: https://competitions.cr.yp.to/round1/proestv11.
pdf.
[Kav12] Selçuk Kavut. “Results on rotation-symmetric S-boxes”. In:Information
Sciences 201 (2012), pp. 93–113.doi: 10.1016/j.ins.2012.02.030.
154 Column Parity Mixers
[KN10] DmitryKhovratovichandIvicaNikolic.“RotationalCryptanalysisofARX”.In:
FSE 2010. Ed. by Seokhie Hong and Tetsu Iwata. Vol. 6147. LNCS. Springer,
Heidelberg, Feb. 2010, pp. 333–346.doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-13858-4_19 .
[Knu95] Lars R. Knudsen. “Truncated and Higher Order Diﬀerentials”. In:FSE’94. Ed.
by Bart Preneel. Vol. 1008. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Dec. 1995, pp. 196–
211. doi: 10.1007/3-540-60590-8_16 .
[Kra+17] Thorsten Kranz, Gregor Leander, Ko Stoﬀelen, and Friedrich Wiemer. “Shorter
Linear Straight-Line Programs for MDS Matrices”. In:IACR Trans. Symm.
Cryptol. 2017.4 (2017), pp. 188–211.issn: 2519-173X.doi: 10.13154/tosc.
v2017.i4.188-211.
[Lea+11] Gregor Leander, Mohamed Ahmed Abdelraheem, Hoda AlKhzaimi, and Erik
Zenner. “A Cryptanalysis of PRINTcipher: The Invariant Subspace Attack”.
In: CRYPTO 2011. Ed. by Phillip Rogaway. Vol. 6841. LNCS. Springer,
Heidelberg, Aug. 2011, pp. 206–221.doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-22792-9_12 .
[LLM16] David C. Lay, Steven R. Lay, and Judi J. McDonald.Linear Algebra and Its
Applications. 5th ed. Pearson, 2016.
[LP07] Gregor Leander and Axel Poschmann. “On the Classiﬁcation of 4 Bit S-Boxes”.
In: Arithmetic of Finite Fields — WAIFI 2007. Ed. by Claude Carlet and
Berk Sunar. Vol. 4547. LNCS. Springer, 2007, pp. 159–176.doi: 10.1007/978-
3-540-73074-3_13 .
[LS16] Meicheng Liu and Siang Meng Sim. “Lightweight MDS Generalized Circulant
Matrices”. In:FSE 2016. Ed. by Thomas Peyrin. Vol. 9783. LNCS. Springer,
Heidelberg, Mar. 2016, pp. 101–120.doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-52993-5_6 .
[LW16] Yongqiang Li and Mingsheng Wang. “On the Construction of Lightweight
Circulant Involutory MDS Matrices”. In:FSE 2016. Ed. by Thomas Peyrin.
Vol. 9783. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Mar. 2016, pp. 121–139.doi: 10.1007/
978-3-662-52993-5_7 .
[LW17] Chaoyun Li and Qingju Wang. “Design of Lightweight Linear Diﬀusion Layers
from Near-MDS Matrices”. In:IACR Trans. Symm. Cryptol.2017.1 (2017),
pp. 129–155.issn: 2519-173X.doi: 10.13154/tosc.v2017.i1.129-155.
[Mat94] Mitsuru Matsui. “Linear Cryptanalysis Method for DES Cipher”. In:EURO-
CRYPT’93. Ed. by Tor Helleseth. Vol. 765. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, May
1994, pp. 386–397.doi: 10.1007/3-540-48285-7_33 .
[MDA17] Silvia Mella, Joan Daemen, and Gilles Van Assche. “New techniques for trail
bounds and application to diﬀerential trails in Keccak”. In:IACR Trans.
Symm. Cryptol.2017.1 (2017), pp. 329–357.issn: 2519-173X.doi: 10.13154/
tosc.v2017.i1.329-357.
[Men16] Bart Mennink. “XPX: Generalized Tweakable Even-Mansour with Improved
Security Guarantees”. In:CRYPTO 2016, Part I. Ed. by Matthew Robshaw
and Jonathan Katz. Vol. 9814. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 2016, pp. 64–
94. doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-53018-4_3 .
[MP13] Nicky Mouha and Bart Preneel.Towards Finding Optimal Diﬀerential Charac-
teristics for ARX: Application to Salsa20. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report
2013/328. http://eprint.iacr.org/2013/328. 2013.
[NIS15] NIST. SHA-3 Standard: Permutation-Based Hash and Extendable-Output
Functions. FIPS 202. Aug. 2015.doi: 10.6028/NIST.FIPS.202.
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 155
[RBG08] Vincent Rijmen, Paulo SLM Barreto, and Décio L Gazzoni Filho. “Rotation
symmetry in algebraically generated cryptographic substitution tables”. In:
Information Processing Letters106.6 (2008), pp. 246–250.doi: 10.1016/j.
ipl.2007.09.012.
[Rij+96] Vincent Rijmen, Joan Daemen, Bart Preneel, Anton Bossalaers, and Erik De
Win. “The Cipher SHARK”. In:FSE’96. Ed. by Dieter Gollmann. Vol. 1039.
LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Feb. 1996, pp. 99–111.doi: 10.1007/3-540-
60865-6_47.
[Sas+15] Yu Sasaki, Yosuke Todo, Kazumaro Aoki, Yusuke Naito, Takeshi Sugawara,
Yumiko Murakami, Mitsuru Matsui, and Shoichi Hirose.Minalpher v1.1.
Submission to the CAESAR competition. 2015.url: https://info.isl.ntt.
co.jp/crypt/minalpher/files/minalpherv11.pdf.
[SS16] Peter Schwabe and Ko Stoﬀelen. “All the AES You Need on Cortex-M3 and
M4”. In:SAC 2016. Ed. by Roberto Avanzi and Howard M. Heys. Vol. 10532.
LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Aug. 2016, pp. 180–194.doi: 10.1007/978-3-
319-69453-5_10.
[TLS16] Yosuke Todo, Gregor Leander, and Yu Sasaki. “Nonlinear Invariant At-
tack - Practical Attack on Full SCREAM, iSCREAM, and Midori64”. In:
ASIACRYPT 2016, Part II. Ed. by Jung Hee Cheon and Tsuyoshi Takagi.
Vol. 10032. LNCS. Springer, Heidelberg, Dec. 2016, pp. 3–33.doi: 10.1007/
978-3-662-53890-6_1 .
A S-box
The S-boxS in algebraic normal form.
b0 = a1 + a2 + a0a2 + a1a2 + a1a2a3
b1 = a2 + a3 + a1a3 + a2a3 + a2a3a0
b2 = a3 + a0 + a2a0 + a3a0 + a3a0a1
b3 = a0 + a1 + a3a1 + a0a1 + a0a1a2
S can be computed more eﬃciently. This takes 4 instructions in ARMv7-M, assuming
the bit lay-out that was sketched in Section 6.5. In the assembly implementation,ai are
stored ins and t is a temporary register.
b0 = a1 + a2(a0 + (a1 OR a3))
b1 = a2 + a3(a1 + (a2 OR a0))
b2 = a3 + a0(a2 + (a3 OR a1))
b3 = a0 + a1(a3 + (a0 OR a2))
.macro gammapart s t
orn \t, \s, \s, ror #16
eor \t, \s, \t, ror #8
and \t, \t, \s, ror #16
eor \s, \t, \s, ror #24
.endm
156 Column Parity Mixers
The inverse S-boxS−1 in algebraic normal form.
a0 = b0 + b1 + b3 + b0b2 + b1b2 + b1b3 + b1b2b3
a1 = b1 + b2 + b0 + b1b3 + b2b3 + b2b0 + b2b3b0
a2 = b2 + b3 + b1 + b2b0 + b3b0 + b3b1 + b3b0b1
a3 = b3 + b0 + b2 + b3b1 + b0b1 + b0b2 + b0b1b2
S−1 can be computed more eﬃciently. This takes 4 instructions in ARMv7-M.
a0 = b3 + (b2(b0 + (b1b3)))
a1 = b0 + (b3(b1 + (b2b0)))
a2 = b1 + (b0(b2 + (b3b1)))
a3 = b2 + (b1(b3 + (b0b2)))
.macro invgammapart s t
bic \t, \s, \s, ror #16
eor \t, \s, \t, ror #24
bic \t, \t, \s, ror #16
eor \s, \t, \s, ror #8
.endm
The S-box as hexadecimal lookup table.
a 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 a b c d e f
S(a) 0 c 9 d 3 a b 2 6 e 5 1 7 8 4 f
Below are the diﬀerence distribution table and linear approximation table of the S-boxS.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 a b c d e f0 16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 01 0 0 0 0 4 0 0 0 2 4 0 2 2 0 0 22 0 2 0 4 0 0 0 2 4 2 0 0 0 0 0 23 0 4 0 0 0 2 0 2 2 0 0 2 2 2 0 04 0 4 2 2 0 0 4 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 25 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 0 0 2 4 2 0 0 2 26 0 2 4 0 0 0 0 2 0 2 2 2 0 0 2 07 0 0 2 2 0 0 2 2 0 2 2 0 0 2 2 08 0 0 4 0 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 4 2 0 29 0 0 0 0 2 0 2 0 4 0 2 2 0 2 2 0a 0 0 0 2 0 4 0 2 0 0 2 0 2 2 0 2b 0 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 2 0 2 0c 0 0 2 2 4 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 0d 0 0 0 0 0 0 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 0 0e 0 0 0 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 0 2 2 2 2 0f 0 2 2 0 2 2 0 0 2 0 2 0 0 0 0 4
DDT
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 a b c d e f0 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 01 0 -2 0 2 0 -2 0 2 4 2 0 2 -4 2 0 22 0 4 -2 2 0 0 2 2 0 -4 -2 2 0 0 2 23 0 -2 -2 0 0 2 2 0 4 2 -2 0 4 -2 2 04 0 0 4 -4 -2 -2 2 2 0 0 0 0 2 2 2 25 0 2 0 -2 2 4 2 0 0 2 0 -2 -2 0 -2 46 0 4 -2 2 -2 -2 0 0 0 4 2 -2 2 2 0 07 0 2 2 0 2 0 0 2 0 2 2 0 -2 -4 4 -28 0 0 0 0 4 0 -4 0 -2 2 -2 2 2 2 2 29 0 -2 0 2 4 -2 4 2 -2 0 2 0 2 0 -2 0a 0 0 2 2 0 0 -2 -2 2 -2 4 0 2 -2 0 4b 0 2 2 0 0 2 -2 4 2 0 0 2 2 0 -4 -2c 0 0 4 4 -2 2 2 -2 -2 2 -2 2 0 0 0 0d 0 2 0 -2 2 0 2 -4 2 0 2 4 0 2 0 -2e 0 0 2 2 2 2 0 0 2 -2 0 -4 0 4 2 -2f 0 -2 -2 0 -2 4 0 2 -2 0 4 2 0 2 2 0
LAT
B Test vectors
Input: 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000 00000000.
Output: 82f0778a 1696c72c 5cd10f7e f3e2b448 dc8c6a7d 2d753216 43d11823 14f5d1f7.
Input: 00010203 04050607 08090a0b 0c0d0e0f 10111213 14151617 18191a1b 1c1d1e1f.
Output: e41eeafb 1c57ee87 a835b347 2ddef9cd 27ab6bff 95fd6df4 548db2bd 065d19b1.
Input: fffefdfc fbfaf9f8 f7f6f5f4 f3f2f1f0 efeeedec ebeae9e8 e7e6e5e4 e3e2e1e0.
Output: aefa559b 3a7a5781 6b10507d 5c68429a 0183a7cb 09575707 985a20c3 71f2d6ac.
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 157
C Minimum weight truncated trails
C.1 In the kernel
The following trails attempt to stay in the kernel for all rounds except the last.
Three rounds
The following trail hasW = 18.
ρ◦ π◦ θ
ρ◦ π◦ θ
Four rounds
The following trail hasW = 52.
ρ◦ π◦ θ
ρ◦ π◦ θ
ρ◦ π◦ θ
C.2 Extending two-round diﬀerential trails outside the kernel
Three rounds
The following trail hasW = 27.
158 Column Parity Mixers
ρ◦ π◦ θ
ρ◦ π◦ θ
Four rounds
The following trail hasW = 46.
ρ◦ π◦ θ
ρ◦ π◦ θ
ρ◦ π◦ θ
C.3 Extending two-round linear trails outside the kernel
Three rounds
The following trail hasW = 27.
ρ◦ π◦ θ
ρ◦ π◦ θ
Four rounds
The following trail hasW = 40.
Ko Stoﬀelen and Joan Daemen 159
ρ◦ π◦ θ
ρ◦ π◦ θ
ρ◦ π◦ θ
D Eﬀect distribution
ThefollowingtableshowstherelationbetweentheHammingweightoftheparity(horizontal
axis) and the Hamming weight of theθ-eﬀect (vertical axis) for Mixifer. The numbers
show the number of possibilities. For example, there is only one possibility where there is
a single odd column. Then there will be three aﬀected columns. With two odd columns, it
is possible that six columns become aﬀected, but it is also possible that a few cancel each
other out and there are only four aﬀected columns.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
2 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 5 0 2 0 0 0 0 0 0
3 1 0 1 0 3 0 11 0 16 0 3 0 0 0 0 0
4 0 3 0 8 0 23 0 40 0 40 0 2 0 0 0 0
5 0 0 9 0 30 0 81 0 111 0 42 0 0 0 0 0
6 0 5 0 31 0 98 0 213 0 134 0 23 0 0 0 0
7 0 0 19 0 96 0 237 0 258 0 99 0 6 0 0 0
8 0 0 0 52 0 206 0 294 0 206 0 52 0 0 0 0
9 0 0 6 0 99 0 258 0 237 0 96 0 19 0 0 0
10 0 0 0 23 0 134 0 213 0 98 0 31 0 5 0 0
11 0 0 0 0 42 0 111 0 81 0 30 0 9 0 0 0
12 0 0 0 2 0 40 0 40 0 23 0 8 0 3 0 0
13 0 0 0 0 3 0 16 0 11 0 3 0 1 0 1 0
14 0 0 0 0 0 2 0 5 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0
15 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
16 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1