USENIX Association
Proceedings of the
12th USENIX Security Symposium
Washington, D.C., USA
August 4–8, 2003
THE ADVANCED COMPUTING SYSTEMS ASSOCIATION
© 2003 by The USENIX Association All Rights Reserved For more information about the USENIX Association:
Phone: 1 510 528 8649 FAX: 1 510 548 5738 Email: office@usenix.org WWW: http://www.usenix.org
Rights to individual papers remain with the author or the author's employer.
 Permission is granted for noncommercial reproduction of the work for educational or research purposes.
This copyright notice must be included in the reproduced paper. USENIX acknowledges all trademarks herein.
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association 29
Denial of Service via Algorithmic Complexity Attacks
Scott A. Crosby Dan S. Wallach
scrosby@cs.rice.edu dwallach@cs.rice.edu
Department of Computer Science, Rice University
Abstract
We present a new class of low-bandwidth denial of
service attacks that exploit algorithmic deﬁciencies
inmanycommonapplications’datastructures. Fre-
quently used data structures have “average-case”
expected running time that’s far more efﬁcient than
the worst case. For example, both binary trees and
hash tables can degenerate to linked lists with care-
fully chosen input. We show how an attacker can
effectivelycomputesuchinput,andwedemonstrate
attacks against the hash table implementations in
two versions of Perl, the Squid web proxy, and the
Bro intrusion detection system. Using bandwidth
less than a typical dialup modem, we can bring a
dedicated Bro server to its knees; after six min-
utesofcarefullychosenpackets,ourBroserverwas
droppingasmuchas71%ofitstrafﬁcandconsum-
ing all of its CPU. We show how modern universal
hashing techniques can yield performance compa-
rable to commonplace hash functions while being
provably secure against these attacks.
1 Introduction
When analyzing the running time of algorithms,
a common technique is to differentiate best-case,
common-case,andworst-castperformance. Forex-
ample, an unbalanced binary tree will be expected
to consume O(nlogn) time to insert n elements,
but if the elements happen to be sorted beforehand,
then the tree would degenerate to a linked list, and
it would takeO(n2) time to insert alln elements.
Similarly, a hash table would be expected to con-
sume O(n) time to insertn elements. However, if
each element hashes to the same bucket, the hash
tablewillalsodegeneratetoalinkedlist,anditwill
take O(n2)time to insertn elements.
While balanced tree algorithms, such as red-black
trees [11], AVL trees [1], and treaps [17] can avoid
predictable input which causes worst-case behav-
ior, and universal hash functions [5] can be used
to make hash functions that are not predictable by
anattacker,manycommonapplicationsusesimpler
algorithms. If an attacker can control and predict
the inputs being used by these algorithms, then the
attacker may be able to induce the worst-case exe-
cution time, effectively causing a denial-of-service
(DoS) attack.
Such algorithmic DoS attacks have much in com-
monwithotherlow-bandwidthDoSattacks,suchas
stacksmashing[2]ortheping-of-death 1,whereina
relativelyshortmessagecausesanInternetserverto
crash or misbehave. While a variety of techniques
can be used to address these DoS attacks, com-
mon industrial practice still allows bugs like these
to appear in commercial products. However, unlike
stacksmashing,attacksthattargetpoorlychosenal-
gorithms can function even against code written in
safe languages. One early example was discovered
by Garﬁnkel [10], who described nested HTML
tables that induced the browser to perform super-
linear work to derive the table’s on-screen layout.
More recently, Stubbleﬁeld and Dean [8] described
attacks against SSL servers, where a malicious
web client can coerce a web server into perform-
ing expensive RSA decryption operations. They
1http://www.insecure.org/sploits/
ping-o-death.html has a nice summary.
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association30
Bucket
0
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 1: Normal operation of a hash table.
suggested the use of crypto puzzles [9] to force
clientstoperformmoreworkbeforetheserverdoes
its work. Provably requiring the client to con-
sume CPU time may make sense for fundamen-
tallyexpensiveoperationslikeRSAdecryption,but
it seems out of place when the expensive opera-
tion (e.g., HTML table layout) is only expensive
because a poor algorithm was used in the system.
Another recent paper [16] is a toolkit that allows
programmers to inject sensors and actuators into a
program. When a resource abuse is detected an ap-
propriate action is taken.
This paper focuses on DoS attacks that may be
mounted from across a network, targeting servers
with the data that they might observe and store in
a hash table as part of their normal operation. Sec-
tion 2 details how hash tables work and how they
can be vulnerable to malicious attacks. Section 3
describes vulnerabilities in the Squid web cache,
the DJB DNS server, and Perl’s built-in hash ta-
bles. Section 4 describes vulnerabilities in the Bro
intrusiondetectionsystem. Section5presentssome
possible solutions to our attack. Finally, Section 6
gives our conclusions and discusses future work.
2 Attacking hash tables
Hash tables are widely used throughout computer
systems. They are used internally in compilers to
tracksymboltables. Theyareusedinternallyinop-
eratingsystemsforeverythingfromIPfragmentre-
assembly to ﬁlesystem directory lookup. Hash ta-
Bucket
0
1
2
3
4
5
Figure 2: Worst-case hash table collisions.
bles are so common that programming languages
like Perl provide syntactic sugar to represent hash
tablesas“associativearrays,”makingthemeasyfor
programmers to use. Programmers clearly prefer
hash tables for their constant-time expected behav-
ior,despitetheirworst-case O(n)per-operationrun-
ning time. After all, what are the odds that a hash
table will degenerate to its worst case behavior?
In typical usage, objects to be inserted into a
hashtable are ﬁrst reduced to a 32-bithash value.
Strings might be hashed using a checksum oper-
ator like CRC32 or MD5, but are usually hashed
by much simpler algorithms. More complex ob-
jects might have custom-written hash-value oper-
ators. The hash table then takes this hash value,
modulo the bucket count, the size of the array of
pointers to data being stored in the hash table, de-
termining the bucket that will hold the reference to
the object being inserted. When two inputs map
the the same bucket, acollision has occurred. To
deal with this case, eachhash bucketholds a linked
list of all inserted objects whose hash value, mod-
ulo the bucket count, maps to that particular bucket
(see Figure 1). These linked lists are referred to
as hash chains. When the total number of objects
in the hash table grows too large, resulting in long
average chain length, the size of the array of hash
buckets is typically increased, perhaps multiplied
by a constant factor, and the entries in the table are
reinserted, takingtheirhashvaluesmodulothenew
bucket count.
There are other methods of implementing hash ta-
bles, including open addressing, where collisions
are not resolved using hash chains. Instead, the
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association 31
system follows a deterministic strategy to probe for
an empty hash bucket, where the object is then in-
serted. Although this paper focuses on hash chain-
ing, the attacks described here will be at least as
effective on open addressing hash tables.
Theworsecase(seeFigure2)canoccurfortworea-
sons: either the 32-bit hash values are identical, or
the hash values modulo the bucket count becomes
identical. Ofcourse,forrandomlychoseninput,the
odds of every object hashing to the same bucket is
vanishinglysmall—
(1
b
)n−1
for bbucketsand nob-
jects. For maliciously chosen input, however, it be-
comes entirely feasible. If the hash table is check-
ing for duplicates when a new object is inserted,
perhaps to guarantee that it acts as a mapping from
object keys to values, then it will need to scan ev-
ery entry in the hash bucket. This will induce the
worst-case O(n)behavior for each insert.
There are only a few requirements in order to en-
gage in such an attack. First, the hash function be-
ingusedmustbedeterministicandknowntotheat-
tacker. Second,theattackerneedstheabilitytopre-
dictorsupplyalloftheinputbeingusedbythehash
function. Third, the attacker needs to ensure that a
sufﬁcient volume of attack input gets to the victim
such that they experience a performance degrada-
tion.
The attacker must understand how raw data, ini-
tially read by the application from the network,
is processed before it is inserted into the hash ta-
ble. Knowing this, the attacker must compute ob-
jectsthatwilleventuallycollide,eitherinthe32-bit
hash-valuespace,oronlyintheeventualhashbuck-
ets. Section 2.1 will describe how these collisions
can be efﬁciently computed for some hash func-
tions. At worst, computing hash collisions requires
an attacker to exhaustively search within the space
of possible inputs. While expensive, the attacker
can do this work ahead of time. Ultimately, the
question is whether the victim will accept enough
attack-input for the O(n2) worst-case behavior to
manifestitself. Furthermore,somevictimsmayen-
force various limits on the growth of their hash ta-
bles, making them robust against this class of at-
tack. We describe such limits in Section 2.2.
2.1 Constructing a speciﬁc attack
The ﬁrst step in analyzing a program’s vulnerabil-
ities to this attack is to determine where hash ta-
bles are being used and identifying whether exter-
nal, untrusted input can be fed directly into the ta-
ble. This can be time consuming. As an example,
theBindDNSserverplacessomefourdifferentab-
straction layers between the network and the ulti-
mate hash table storing DNS bindings. Tracing this
can be tedious work for an attacker unfamiliar with
the source code.
2.1.1 Hash collision versus bucket collision
An attacker may not know the bucket count ex-
actly; many implementations change the bucket
count based on the number of objects stored in the
hash table. However, given the application’s source
code,anattackermaybeabletoguesspossibleval-
ues for the bucket count. This leads to two avenues
of attack: those where youdon’t care abou t the
bucket count and those where you know or guess
the bucket count.
Ifcollisionscanbecomputedinthefull32-bithash-
value space, then the bucket count is irrelevant;
the hash table will exhibit worst-case behavior re-
gardless of how many buckets it has. More for-
mally,wewishtoderiveinputs k1,k2,... ki suchthat
Hash(k1)= Hash(k2)= ... = Hash(ki). We refer
to these ashash collisions. If the inputs have dif-
ferent hash values, but still collide into the same
bucket (e.g., after a modulo operation has taken
place), we refer to these asbucket collisions. For-
mally, a bucket collision is when we derive inputs
k1,k2,... ki such that f (k1)= f (k2)= ... = f (ki)
where f is the the function mapping from inputs to
buckets. In many cases,f (k)= Hash(k)( mod n) ,
with n being the number of buckets.
While hash collisions would seem straightforward,
they do not always result in a feasible attack. For
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association32
example, consider an attacker who wishes to at-
tack an intrusion detection system (IDS) scanning
TCP/IP SYN packets to detect SYN ﬂooding ac-
tivity. If the IDS is remembering packets based
purely on the source and destination IP addresses
and port numbers, this would give the attacker a
96-bit search space. However, the destination ad-
dress must be close enough to the IDS for the IDS
to observe the trafﬁc. Likewise, the attacker’s ser-
vice provider may do egress ﬁltering that prevents
forged source IP addresses. This could reduce the
attackertoaslittleas48-bitsoffreedominselecting
packets. If the hash function reduces these packets
to 32-bit hash values, then there will be, on aver-
age, 216 packets that an attacker can possibly send
which will collide in the 32-bit hash-value space.
216 values stored in the same hash bucket may or
may not be enough to noticeably degrade the IDS’s
performance.
Conversely, suppose the attacker wishes to com-
pute bucket collisions rather than hash collisions.
Because the bucket count is much smaller than the
sizeofthehash-valuespace, itwillbeeasiertoﬁnd
bucket collisions. Thus, if the attacker can predict
the precise bucket count, then many more possible
collisions can be computed. This ﬂexiblity may al-
loweffectiveattacksonapplicationshashinginputs
as short as 32-bits. However, if there are several
possible bucket counts, then the attacker has sev-
eral options:
• Guess the bucket count.
• Compute collisions that work for several dif-
ferent bucket counts.
• Send several streams of attack data, where
each stream is designed to collide for one par-
ticular bucket count.
Computing collisions that work for multiple bucket
counts is not practical; the search space grows pro-
portionallytotheleastcommonmultipleofthecan-
didate bucket counts. This can easily exceed the
32-bit space of hash values, making hash collisions
more attractive to compute than bucket collisions.
However, if the number of candidate bucket counts
(c) is small enough, then the attacker can com-
pute separate attack streams focused on each po-
tential bucket count. If the attacker sends n ob-
jects of attack data, then most of the attack data(
n
(
1 −1
c
))
will be distributed throughout the hash
table, with an expectedO(1) insert per object. The
remaining n
c objects, however, will cause an ex-
pected O
((n
c
)2)
total running time. Furthermore,
if the hash table happens to be resized and one of
the attack streams corresponds to the new bucket
count, then the resulting hash table will still exhibit
quadratic performance problems.
For simplicity, the remainder of this paper focuses
on computing hash collisions. Later, when we de-
scribeattacksagainstanactualIDS(seeSection4),
we will show that 216 collisions in one bucket are
more than sufﬁcient to mount an effective attack.
2.1.2 Ef ﬁciently deriving hash collisions
The hash functions used by typical programs for
theirhashtablesaregenerallynotcryptographically
strong functions like MD5 or SHA-1. Instead, they
tend to be functions with 32 bits of internal state,
designed primarily for speed. Because this state is
limited, we need only ﬁnd inputs such that the in-
ternal state after hashing is the same as the initial
state.
Consider a hash function with the initial state of
0. Imagine we can ﬁnd generators, or inputs
k1,k2,... ki such that 0= Hash(k1)= Hash(k2)=
... = Hash(ki). Thentheconcatenationofanynum-
ber of these generators in any combination and any
order also hashes to 0. So,k1k2 also hashes to 0,
as willk1k1 or k2k1k3k2. Thus, by ﬁnding three in-
puts k1, k2, k3 viaexhaustivesearchandconcatenat-
ing them combinatorially, we can generate a large
number of collisions without requiring any addi-
tional searching. The number of possible collisions
is bounded only by the maximum length to which
we are willing to allow concatenated generators to
grow. This process can be generalized by ﬁnding
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association 33
a set of generators closed over a small number of
hash states (i.e., searching for generators that take
hash states less than a small integer to other hash
states less than the same small integer).
In simple tests, attacking the Perl 5.6.1 hash func-
tions on a 450MHz Pentium-2 processor, 30 min-
utes of CPU time enumerating and hashing all 8
character alphabetic strings was sufﬁcient to ﬁnd
46 generators that hash to zero. By concatenating
three of them combinatorially, we derive 463 (97k)
alphabetic inputs, 24 characters long, that will all
hash to the same 32-bit hash value.
Hash collisions can be efﬁciently computed for a
number of other common applications. The Linux
protocol stack and the Bro intrusion detection sys-
tem simply XOR their input together, 32 bits at a
time. Thus, collisions may be directly computed
from the algebraic structure of the hash function.
2.2 Application limits on hash tables
Many applications are sensitive about their over-
all memory usage, and thus have limits designed
to control how large their hash tables might grow.
Ifahashtablecanneverhaveenoughelementsinit
fortheworst-case O(n2)behaviortodominate,then
our attack will fail.
2.2.1 Explicit limits
Someapplicationshaveexplicitlimitsontheirhash
tables. We ﬁrst consider the Linux IP fragment re-
assemblycode. Inresponsetoearlierattacks,Linux
currently allows at most 256 kbytes of storage to-
ward reassembling incomplete packets. If we wish
to attack the hash table being used to store these
packetfragments,thelongesthashchainwecanin-
duce will still be under 256 kbytes in total. We can
still force Linux to repeatedly scan this chain, in-
creasing the CPU load on the kernel, but we are
unsure whether we can cause enough slowdown to
be interesting.
(Florian Weimer reports that he found an ex-
ploitable hashing vulnerability in the Linux route
cache, allowing 400 packets per second from an at-
tacker to overload a quad-processor Pentium Xeon
server, despite the size limits present in the route
cache’s hash table [20].)
The Apache web server collects ﬁelds from HTTP
request headers into a vector (auto-sizing array). If
there are multiple header ﬁelds with the same type,
Apache concatenates them with an O(n2) opera-
tion. This was a target for attack [19], however
Apachenowimposesalimitonthenumberofﬁelds
that can appear in an HTTP request (100 ﬁelds, by
default). Even with 100 entries naming the same
ﬁeld, aO(n2) worst-case running time will still be
small, becausen is too small for the quadratic per-
formance to become noticeable.
2.2.2 Implicit limits
There are many other places where there are lim-
its on the attacker’s ability to inﬂuence a hash ta-
ble. For instance, as discussed in Section 2.1.1, the
freedom of an attacker to construct arbitrary inputs
may be limited. In the case of network packets in-
tended to attack a network sniffer, the attacker is
limited both by the packet ﬁelds being watched by
the sniffer, and by the packet headers necessary to
routethepackettowardthetargetedmachine. More
generally, many applications operate on restricted
datatypes,orotherwiseplacelimitsonanattacker’s
ability to generate arbitrary input for the targeted
hash table. In some sense, these applications are
lucky, but they could be vulnerable to attack in the
future if their environment changes (e.g., moving
from IPv4 to IPv6 will increase the size of IP ad-
dresses, giving more freedom to attack tables that
hash IP addresses).
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association34
3 Application analysis: Squid, DJBDNS,
and Perl
We did a short analysis of three programs to ana-
lyzehowvulnerabletheyaretoattack. Weanalyzed
and attacked the hash tables used by two versions
of the the Perl interpreter. We also analyzed and at-
tackedtheSquidwebproxycache. Weinvestigated
the DJB DNS cache and found it less vulnerable to
these attacks.
3.1 Squid
The Squid Internet object cache [14] is intended to
reduce network bandwidth by caching frequently
used objects [7]. We analyzed the hash tables used
within version 2.5STABLE1.
While we have not performed an exhaustive audit
of Squid, we did discover a hash table used to track
objects cached in memory. The hash table is keyed
with an integer counter, the HTTP request method
(i.e., GET, HEAD, etc.), and the URL in question.
When Squid is operating as part of a caching clus-
ter, it omits the integer counter and only hashes the
HTTP request method and URL. (For reasons that
escape us, Squid calls this “private key” vs. “pub-
lic key” mode; this seems to have nothing to do
with the traditional cryptographic senses of those
terms.) An MD5 cryptographic checksum is per-
formed over these values, and the resulting 128-bit
value is truncated to 13 bits, identifying the hash
bucket.
As an attacker, we cannot necessarily predict the
value of the counter, making it difﬁcult to compute
hash collisions. However, Squid can be tricked into
believing that it is part of a cluster by sending it
a single UDP packet, an Internet Caching Proto-
col (ICP) MISSNO FETCH message [21]. This
packet is accepted by the default conﬁguration, and
it’s unclear whether this packet could be easily ﬁl-
tered, even using Squid’s access control features.
Regardless,anySquidclusterwouldalreadybefor-
going the use of the “private key” mode, and thus
would be vulnerable to attack.
A full benchmarking environment for Squid would
requiremultiplewebserversandclientstosimulate
the load experienced by the Squid web cache. To
simplify things, we ran Squid on a stand-alone ma-
chine, where the URL requests were parsed from a
localﬁleandweresatisﬁedwithconstant-sizedweb
page results, served by a local proxy server. This
environment is undeniably not suitable for mak-
ing general remarks about Squid’s general-purpose
throughput,butitallowsustoplacepressureonthis
particular hash table and observe the effects.
We measured the wall-clock time necessary for
Squid, in our restrictive conﬁguration, to load ap-
proximately 143k URLs. We compared the per-
formance of loading randomly chosen URLs with
URLscarefullychosentocollidewithSquid’shash
function. Squid took 14.57 minutes to process the
attack URLs versus 10.55 minutes to process the
randomly chosen URLs. Thus, our attack added,
onaverage,approximately1.7msoflatencytoeach
request serviced by the Squid cache.
This attack does not represent a “smoking gun” for
algorithmic complexity attacks, but it does illus-
trate how common network services may be sen-
sitive to these attacks. Furthermore, this attack
demonstrates how seemingly innocuous features
(e.g., Squid’s “private key” mechanism, whatever
it actually does) may have an effect on an applica-
tion’s resistance to these attacks.
3.2 DJBDNS
Dan Bernstein’s DNS server is designed to have
several independent programs serving different du-
ties. His DNS cache is one program in this collec-
tion. If we can pollute the cache with requests for
domains under our control (e.g., “x1.attacker.org”,
“x2.attacker.org”, etc.), we may be able to mount
an algorithmic complexity attack against the DNS
cache’s hash table.
Upon code inspection, DJBDNS uses a determin-
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association 35
istic hash function in its implementation of a DNS
cache. Interestingly,thelookupcodehasanexplicit
check for being subject to “hash ﬂooding;” after
following a chain for 100 entries, it gives up and
treats the request as a cache miss. We presume this
design is intended to prevent the DNS cache from
burning an excessive amount of CPU on any given
request. Bernstein essentially anticipated a version
of our attack, although, as we discuss in Section 5,
his ﬁx could be improved.
3.3 Perl
Perl is a widely-used programming language with
built-in support for hash tables (called “associative
arrays”). While attacking a large number of Perl
scripts is behind the scope of this paper, we expect
that many deployed Perl scripts take untrusted in-
put and store it directly in associative arrays. We
demonstrate attacks against the associative arrays
in Perl, versions 5.6.1 and 5.8.0; the hash function
was changed between these two versions.
The hash functions in both versions of Perl form
state machines. The internal state is the 32 bit ac-
cumulated hash value. The input being hashed is
mixedin,onebyteatatime,usingacombinationof
addition, multiplication, and shift operations. The
structure of the hash functions in both Perl 5.6.1
and5.8.0allowustoefﬁcientlycomputegenerators
(seeSection2.1.2). SpendingaroundoneCPUhour
attacking both hash functions, we were able to ﬁnd
46 generators for Perl 5.6.1 and 48 generators for
Perl5.8.0, yielding97k-110kcollidinginputsof24
characters in length. We then loaded these strings
directly into associative arrays in both interpreters.
The results are presented in Table 1. When an in-
terpreterisfedtheinputdesignedtocollidewithits
hash function, the running time was three orders of
magnitude worse (2 seconds vs. almost two hours)
than when fed the data designed to attack the other
Perlversion. Thisrepresentshowdevastatinganal-
gorithmic complexity attack can be. One hour of
pre-computed CPU work, on the client, can cause
almost two hours of online work for a server. Dou-
bling the number of inputs by either ﬁnding new
Perl 5.6.1 Perl 5.8.0
File version program program
Perl 5.6.1 6506 seconds <2 seconds
Perl 5.8.0 <2 seconds 6838 seconds
Table1: CPUtimeinserting90kshortattackstrings
into two versions of Perl.
generators or using longer inputs would quadruple
the victim’s work. The exponent in the victim’s
O(n2)worst-case behavior is clearly dominant.
4 Application analysis: Bro
Bro[15]isageneral-purposenetworkintrusionde-
tection system (IDS) that can be conﬁgured to scan
for a wide variety of possible attacks. Bro is open-
source and is used in production at a number of
commercial and academic sites. This makes it an
attractive target, particularly because we can di-
rectly study its source code. Also, given that Bro’s
job is to scan and record network packets, correlat-
ing events in real time to detect attacks, we imag-
ine it has numerous large hash tables with which it
tracks these events. If we could peg Bro’s CPU us-
age, we potentially knock the IDS off the air, clear-
ing the way for other attacks to go undetected.
In order to keep up with trafﬁc, Bro uses packet ﬁl-
ters [13] to select and capture desired packets, as
a function of its conﬁguration. Following this, Bro
implementsanevent-basedarchitecture. Newpack-
ets raise events to be processed. Synthetic events
can also be timed to occur in the future, for exam-
ple, to track the various time-outs that occur in the
TCP/IP protocol. A number of Bro modules ex-
ist to process speciﬁc protocols, such as FTP, DNS,
SMTP, Finger, HTTP, and NTP.
4.1 Analysis
Bro contains approximately 67,000 lines of C++
code that implement low-level mechanisms to ob-
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association36
serve network trafﬁc and generate events. Bro also
providesawideselectionofscripts,comprisingap-
proximately 9000 lines of code in its own inter-
preted language that use the low-level mechanisms
to observe network behavior and react appropri-
ately. While we have not exhaustively studied the
source code to Bro, we did observe that Bro uses
a simple hash table whose hash function simply
XORstogetheritsinputs. Thismakescollisionsex-
ceptionally straightforward to derive. The remain-
ing issue for an attack any is to determine how and
when incoming network packets are manipulated
before hash table entries are generated.
We decided to focus our efforts on Bro’s port
scanning detector, primarily due to its simplicity.
For each source IP address, Bro needs to track
how many distinct destination ports have been con-
tacted. It uses a hash table to track, for each tuple
of ⟨source IP address, destination port⟩, whether
any internal machine has been probed on a given
port from that particular source address. To attack
this hash table, we observe that the attacker has 48-
bits of freedom: a 32-bit source IP address and a
16-bit destination port number. (We’re now assum-
ing the attacker has the freedom to forge arbitrary
source IP addresses.) If our goal is to compute
32-bit hash collisions (i.e., before the modulo op-
eration to determine the hash bucket), then for any
good hash function, we would expect there to be
approximately 216 possible collisions we might be
abletoﬁndforanygiven32-bithashvalue. Inahy-
potheticalIPv6implementationofBro,therewould
be signiﬁcantly more possible collisions, given the
larger space of source IP addresses.
Deriving these collisions with Bro’s XOR-based
hash function requires understanding the precise
way that Bro implements its hash function. In this
case, the hash function is the source IP address,
in network byte order, XORed with the destination
port number, in host order. This means that on a
little-endian computer, such as an x86 architecture
CPU, the high-order 16 bits of the hash value are
taken straight from the last two octets of the IP ad-
dress, while the low-order 16 bits of the hash value
resultfromtheﬁrsttwooctetsoftheIPaddressand
the port number. Hash collisions can be derived
by ﬂipping bits in the ﬁrst two octets of the IP ad-
dress in concert with the matching bits of the port
number. Thisallowsus,forevery32-bittargethash
value,toderiveprecisely2 16 inputpacketsthatwill
hash to the same value.
Wecouldalsohaveattemptedtoderivebucketcolli-
sionsdirectly,whichwouldallowustoderivemore
than 216 collisions in a single hash bucket. While
we could guess the bucket count, or even gener-
ate parallel streams designed to collide in a num-
ber of different bucket counts as discussed in Sec-
tion 2.1.1, this would require sending a signiﬁcant
amount of additional trafﬁc to the Bro server. If the
216 hashcollisionsaresufﬁcienttocauseannotica-
ble quadratic explosion inside Bro, then this would
be the preferable attack.
4.2 Attack implementation
We have designed attack trafﬁc that can make Bro
saturate the CPU and begin to drop trafﬁc within
30 seconds during a 160kb/s, 500 packets/second
ﬂood, and within 7 minutes with a 16kb/s ﬂood.
Our experiments were run over an idle Ethernet,
with a laptop computer transmitting the packets to
a Bro server, version 0.8a20, running on a dual-
CPUPentium-2machine,runningat450MHz,with
768MBofRAM,andrunningtheLinux2.4.18ker-
nel. Bro only uses a single thread, allowing other
processes to use the second CPU. For our experi-
ments, we conﬁgured Bro exclusively to track port
scanningactivity. InaproductionBroserver,where
it might be tracking many different forms of net-
workmisbehavior,thememoryandCPUconsump-
tion would be strictly higher than we observed in
our experiments.
4.3 Attack results
We ﬁrst present the performance of Bro, operating
inanoff-linemode,consumingpacketsonlyasfast
as it can process them. We then present the latency
and drop-rate of Bro, operating online, digesting
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association 37
Attack Random
Total CPU time 44.50 min .86 min
Hash table time 43.78 min .02 min
Table 2: Total CPU time and CPU time spent in
hash table code during an ofﬂine processing run of
64k attack and 64k random SYN packets.
packets at a variety of different bandwidths.
4.3.1 Of ﬂine CPU consumption
Normally, on this hardware, Bro can digest about
1200 SYN packets per second. We note that this
is only 400kb/s, so Bro would already be vulnera-
ble to a simple ﬂood of arbitrary SYN packets. We
alsonotethatBroappearstouseabout500bytesof
memory per packet when subject to random SYN
packets. At a rate of 400kb/s, our Bro system, even
if it had 4GB of RAM, would run out of memory
within two hours.
We have measured the ofﬂine running time for Bro
to consume 64k randomly chosen SYN packets.
We then measured the time for Bro to consume
the same 64k randomly chosen packets, to warm
up the hash table, followed by 64k attack packets.
This minimizes rehashing activity during the attack
packets and more closely simulates the load that
Bro might observe had it been running for a long
timeandexperiencedasuddenburstofattackpack-
ets. The CPU times given in Table 2 present the re-
sults of benchmarking Bro under this attack. The
results show that the attack packets introduce two
orders of magnitude of overhead to Bro, overall,
and three orders of magnitude of overhead specif-
ically in Bro’s hash table code. Under this attack,
Bro can only process 24 packets per second instead
of its normal rate of 1200 packets per second.
In the event that Bro was used to process an ex-
tended amount of data, perhaps captured for later
ofﬂineanalysis,thenanhourofverylowbandwidth
attack trafﬁc (16kb/s, 144k packets, 5.8Mbytes of
Packet rate Packets sent Drop rate
16kb/s 192k 31%
16kb/s (clever) 128k 71%
64kb/s 320k 75%
160kb/s 320k 78%
Table 3: Overall drop rates for the different attack
scenarios.
trafﬁc) would take Bro 1.6 hours to analyze instead
of 3 minutes. An hour of T1-level trafﬁc (1.5Mb/s)
wouldtakeaweekinsteadof5hours,assumingthat
Bro didn’t ﬁrst run out of memory.
4.3.2 Online latency and drop-rate
As described above, our attack packets cannot be
processedbyBroinreal-time,evenwithverymod-
esttransmissionrates. Forofﬂineanalysis,thissim-
ply means that Bro will take a while to execute.
For online analysis, it means that Bro will fall be-
hind. The kernel’s packet queues will ﬁll because
Broisn’treadingthedata,andeventuallythekernel
willstartdroppingthepackets. Tomeasurethis,we
constructedseveraldifferentattackscenarios. Inall
cases, wewarmedupBro’shashtablewithapprox-
imately 130k random SYN packets. We then trans-
mitted the attack packets at any one of three differ-
ent bandwidths (16kb/s, 64kb/s, and 160kb/s). We
constructed attacks that transmitted all 216 attack
packets sequentially, multiple times. We also con-
structed a “clever” attack scenario, where we ﬁrst
sent 3/4 of our attack packets and then repeated
the remaining 1/4 of the packets. The clever at-
tack forces more of the chain to be scanned before
the hash table discovered the new value is already
present in the hash chain.
Table 3 shows the approximate drop rates for four
attack scenarios. We observe that an attacker with
even a fraction of a modem’s bandwidth, transmit-
ting for less than an hour, can cause Bro to drop,
onaverage,71%ofitsincomingtrafﬁc. Thiswould
make an excellent precursor to another network at-
tackthattheperpetratordidnotwishtobedetected.
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association38
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 0  5  10  15  20  25
Delay in seconds
Minutes into the Attack
A
B
C
Figure 3: Packet processing latency, 16kb/s.
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
 16
 18
 20
 0  5  10  15  20  25
Thousands dropped
Minutes into the Attack
A BC
Figure 4: Cumulative dropped packets, 16kb/s.
Bro’s drop rate is not constant. In fact, Bro mani-
fests interesting oscillations in its drop rate, which
are visible in Figures 3 through 6. These graphs
present Bro’s packet processing latency and cu-
mulative packet drop rate for attack packets being
transmitted at 16 kb/sec and 64 kb/sec.
At time A, the latency (time between packet ar-
rival and packet processing) starts increasing as to-
tal processing cost per packet begins to exceed the
packet inter-arrival time.
At timeB, Bro is sufﬁciently back-logged that the
kernel has begun to drop packets. As a result, Bro
starts catching up on its backlogged packets. Dur-
ing this phase, the Bro server is dropping virtually
all of its incoming trafﬁc.
At time C, Bro has caught up on its backlog, and
the kernel is no longer dropping packets. The cycle
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 0  1  2  3  4  5  6
Delay in seconds
Minutes into the Attack
A
B
C
Figure 5: Packet processing latency, 64kb/s.
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 30
 35
 40
 45
 0  1  2  3  4  5  6
Thousands dropped
Minutes into the Attack
A B
C
Figure 6: Cumulative dropped packets, 64kb/s.
cannowstartagain. However,thehashchainunder
attack is now larger then it was at timeA. This will
cause subsequent latencies to rise even higher than
they were at timeB.
This cyclic behavior occurs because Bro only adds
entries to this hash table after it has determined
there will be no response to the SYN packet. Bro
normally uses a ﬁve minute timeout. We reduced
this to 30 seconds to reduce our testing time and
make it easier to illustrate our attacks. We antic-
ipate that, if we were to run with the default 5-
minute timeout, the latency swings would have a
longer period and a greater amplitude, do to the ten
times larger queues of unprocessed events which
would be accumulated.
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association 39
4.4 Discussion
Our attack on Bro has focused on its port scanning
detector. Bro and other IDS systems almost cer-
tainly have other hash tables which may grow large
enough to be vulnerable to algorithmic complexity
attacks. For example, Bro has a module to detect
network scans, determining how many destination
hostshavebeensentpacketsbyagivensourcehost.
This module gives 32+ h bits of freedom, whereh
isthenumberofhostbitsinthedestinationnetwork
monitored by the IDS.h is unlikely to be greater
than 16 except for a handful of sites. However, in
an IPv6 network, the sky is the limit. For that mat-
ter, IPv6 gives the attacker a huge amount of free-
dom for any attack where IP addresses are part of
the values being hashed.
Part of any hash table design is the need to ex-
pand the bucket count when the table occupancy
exceeds some threshold. When the hash table has
a large number of objects which hash to the same
bucket after the rehashing operation, then the re-
hashing operation could be as bad asO(n2), if the
hash table were using its normal insertion opera-
tion that checks for duplicates. As it turns out,
Bro does exactly this. In our regular experimen-
tal runs, we “warmed up” the hash tables to pre-
vent any rehashing during the experiment. Before
we changed our experimental setup to do this, we
saw large spikes in our latency measurements that
indicated rehashing was occurring. When rehash-
ing,Brotakes4minutestoprocessatablewith32k
attack entries. Bro takes 20 minutes to process a
table with 64k attack entries. Without IPv6 or us-
ing bucket collisions, we cannot create more colli-
sionsthanthis, althoughmakingtheIDSserverun-
responsive for 20 minutes is certainly an effective
attack.
Although rehashing attacks are extremely potent,
they are not necessarily easy to use; attackers can-
not exploit this window of opportunity unless they
know exactly when it is occurring. Furthermore,
Bro’s hash table will rehash itself at most 12 times
as it grows from 32k entries to 64M entries.
5 Solving algorithmic complexity attacks
When analyzing algorithmic complexity attacks,
we must assume the attacker has access to the
source code of the application, so security through
obscurity is not acceptable. Instead, either the ap-
plication must use algorithms that do not have pre-
dictable worst-case inputs, or the application must
beabletodetectwhenitisexperiencingworst-case
behavior and take corrective action.
5.1 Eliminating worst-case performance
A complete survey of algorithms used in common
systemsisbeyondthescopeofthispaper. Wefocus
our attention on binary trees and on hash tables.
While binary trees are trivial for an attacker to gen-
erateworst-caseinput,manymanyotherdatastruc-
tures like red-black trees [11] and splay trees [18]
have runtime bounds that areguaranteed, regard-
lessoftheirinput. Aweakerbutsufﬁcientcondition
istouseanalgorithmthatdoesnothave predictable
worst-case inputs. For example, treaps [17] are
trees where all nodes are assigned a randomly cho-
sen number upon creation. The tree nodes are ro-
tated such that atree property is preserved on the
input data, as would be expected of any tree, but
a heap property is also maintained on the random
numbers, yielding a tree that is probabilistically
balanced. So long as the program is designed to
prevent the attacker from predicting the random
numbers (i.e., the pseudo-random number genera-
tor is “secure” and is properly initialized), the at-
tacker cannot determine what inputs would cause
the treap to exhibit worst-case behavior.
When attacking hash tables, an attacker’s goal is to
efﬁciently computesecond pre-images to the hash
function,i.e.,if xhashesto h(x)and y ⁄= x,itshould
be infeasible for the attacker to derivey such that
h(y)= h(x). Cryptographically strong hash func-
tionslikeMD5andSHA-1areresistant,ingeneral,
to such attacks. However, when used in hash ta-
bles, the 128 or 160 bits of output from MD5 or
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association40
SHA-1 must eventually be reduced to the bucket
count, making it feasible for an attacker to mount
a brute force search on the hash function to ﬁnd
bucket collisions. Some simple benchmarking on
a 450MHz Pentium-2 allowed us to compute ap-
proximately ﬁve such collisions per second in a
hash table with 512k buckets. This weakness can
be addressed by using keyed versions of MD5 or
SHA-1 (e.g., HMAC [12]). The key, chosen ran-
domly when the program is initialized, will not
be predictable by an attacker; as a result, the at-
tacker will not be able to predict the hash values
used when the program is actually running. When
keyed, MD5 and SHA-1 becomepseudo-random
functions,which,liketreaps,becomeunpredictable
for the attacker. When unkeyed, MD5 and SHA-1
are deterministic functions and subject to bucket
collisions.
5.2 Universal hashing
Replacing deterministic hash functions with
pseudo-random functions gives probabilistic guar-
antees of security. However, a stronger solution,
which can also execute more efﬁciently, is avail-
able. Universal hash functions were introduced
in 1979 [5] and are cited by common algorithm
textbooks (e.g., Cormen, Leiserson, and Rivest [6])
as a solution suitable for adversarial environments.
It has not been standard practice to follow this
advice, but it should be.
WhereMD5andSHA-1aredesignedtoberesistant
to the computation of second pre-images, universal
hash functions are families of functions (with the
speciﬁc function speciﬁed by a key) with the prop-
erty that, for any two arbitrary messagesM and M′,
the odds ofh(M)= h(M′) are less than some small
value ε. This property is sufﬁcient for our needs,
becauseanattackerwhodoesnotknowthespeciﬁc
hash function has guaranteed low odds of comput-
ing hash collisions.
CarterandWegman’soriginalconstructionofauni-
versal hash function computes the sum of a ﬁxed
chosenconstantwiththedotproductofaﬁxedcho-
sen vector with the input, modulo a large prime
number. The ﬁxed chosen constant and vectors
are chosen, randomly, at the beginning, typically
pre-computed using a keyed pseudo-random func-
tion, and reused for every string being hashed. The
only performance issue is that this vector must ei-
ther be pre-computed up to the maximum expected
input length, or it must be recomputed when it
is used, causing a noticeable performance penalty.
More recent constructions, including UMAC [4]
and hash127 [3] use a ﬁxed space despite support-
ing arbitrary-length arguments. UMAC, in partic-
ular, is carefully engineered to run fast on modern
processors, using adds, multiplies, and SIMD mul-
timedia instructions for increased performance.
5.2.1 Universal hash designs
Some software designers are unwilling to use uni-
versal hashing, afraid that it will introduce unac-
ceptable performance overheads in critical regions
of their code. Other software designers simply
need a fast, easy-to-integrate library to solve their
hashing needs. Borrowing code from UMAC and
adding variants hand-optimized for small, ﬁxed-
length inputs, we have implemented a portable C
library suitable for virtually any program’s needs.
Our library includes two different universal hash
functions: the UHASH function, submitted as part
of the (currently expired) UMAC Internet draft
standard [4], and the Carter-Wegman dot-product
construction. We also include a hand-tuned vari-
ant of the Carter-Wegman construction, optimized
to support ﬁxed-length, short inputs, as well as an
additionally tuned version that only yields a 20 bit
result, rather than the usual 32 bits. This may be
appropriate for smaller hash tables, such as used in
Squid (see Section 3.1).
Our Carter-Wegman construction processes the
value to be hashed one byte at a time. These bytes
are multiplied by 32 bits from the ﬁxed vector,
yielding40bitintermediatevaluesthatareaccumu-
lated in a 64 bit counter. One 64-by-32 bit modulo
operation is used at the end to yield the 32 bit hash
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association 41
value. This construction supports inputs of length
upt o2 24 bytes. (A maximum length is declared
by the programmer when a hashing context is al-
located,causingtheﬁxedvectortobeinitializedby
AESincountermode,keyedfrom /dev/random.
Hash inputs longer than this are rejected.)
Our initial tests showed that UHASH signiﬁcantly
outperformed the Carter-Wegman construction for
long inputs, but Carter-Wegman worked well for
short inputs. Since many software applications of
hash functions know, apriori, that their inputs are
small and of ﬁxed length (e.g., in-kernel network
stacks that hash portions of IP headers), we wished
to provide carefully tuned functions to make such
hashingfaster. Byﬁxingthelengthoftheinput, we
could fully unroll the internal loop and avoid any
function calls. GCC inlines our hand-tuned func-
tion. Furthermore, the Carter-Wegman construc-
tion can be implemented with a smaller accumu-
lator. Without changing the mathematics of Carter-
Wegman, we can multiply 8 bit values with 20 bit
entries in the ﬁxed vector and use a 32 bit accumu-
lator. Forinputslessthan16-bytes,theaccumulator
will not overﬂow, and we get a 20 bit hash value as
a result. The inputs are passed as separate formal
arguments, rather than in an array. This gives the
compiler ample opportunity for inlining and spe-
cializing the function.
5.2.2 Universal hash microbenchmarks
We performed our microbenchmarking on a Pen-
tium 2, 450MHz computer. Because hash tables
tend to use a large amount of data, but only read
it once, working set size and its resultant impact
on cache miss rates cannot be ignored. Our mi-
crobenchmark is designed to let us measure the ef-
fects of hitting or missing in the cache. We pick
an array size, then ﬁll it with random data. We then
hasharandomsub-rangeofit. Dependingonthear-
ray size chosen and whether it ﬁts in the L1 cache,
L2 cache, or not, the performance can vary signiﬁ-
cantly.
In our tests, the we microbenchmarked two con-
ventional algorithms, four universal hashing al-
gorithms, and one cryptographic hash algorithm:
Perl Perl 5.8.0 hash function
MD5 cryptographic hash function
UHASH UMAC universal hash function
CW Carter-Wegman,onebyteprocess-
ing, variable-length input, 64 bit
accumulator, 32 bit output
CW12 Carter-Wegman,twobyteprocess-
ing, 12-byte ﬁxed input, 64 bit ac-
cumulator, 32 bit output
CW12-20 Carter-Wegman,onebyteprocess-
ing, 12-byte ﬁxed input, 32 bit ac-
cumulator, 20 bit output
XOR12 fourbyteprocessing,12-byteﬁxed
input, 32 bit output
In addition to Perl, MD5, UHASH, and three vari-
ants of the Carter-Wegman construction, we also
include a specialized function that simply XORs
its input together, four bytes at a time. This sim-
ulates the sort of hash function used by many
performance-paranoid systems.
Figure 7 shows the effects of changing the work-
ing set size on hash performance. All the hash
functions are shown hashing 12-byte inputs, cho-
sen from an array whose sizes have been chosen to
ﬁt within the L1 cache, within the L2 cache, and to
miss both caches. The largest size simulates the ef-
fect that will be seen when the data being hashed is
freshlyreadfromanetworkbufferorhasotherwise
not yet been processed. We believe this most ac-
curatelyrepresentsthecachingthroughputthatwill
beobservedinpractice,ashashvaluesaretypically
only computed once, and then written into an ob-
ject’s internal ﬁeld, somewhere, for later compari-
son.
As one would expect, the simplistic XOR12 hash
function radically outperforms its rivals, but the ra-
tio shrinks as the working set size increases. With
a 6MB working set, XOR12’s throughput is 50
MB/sec,whereasCW12-20is33MB/sec. Thisrel-
atively modest difference says that universal hash-
ing, with its strong security guarantees, can ap-
proach the performance of even the weakest hash
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association42
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 160
 180
Perl MD5 UHASH CW CW12 CW12-20 XOR12
Throughput (Mbyte/sec)
391
12KByte
240KByte
6MByte
Figure 7: Effect of working set on hash performance on 12-byte inputs.
functions. We can also see that universal hashing is
competitive with Perl’s hash function and radically
outperforms MD5.
Asthecachehitrateincreaseswithasmallerwork-
ing set, XOR12 radically outperforms its competi-
tion. We argue that this case is unlikely to occur
in practice, as the data being hashed is likely to
incur cache misses while it’s being read from the
network hardware into main memory and then the
CPU. Secondly, we are microbenchmarking hash
functionperformance,ahashfunctionisonlyaper-
centage of overall hash table runtime which is only
a percentage of application runtime. Of course, in-
dividual application designers will need to try uni-
versal hashing out to see how it impacts their own
systems.
Some applications hash longer strings and require
general-purpose hash functions. Figure 8 uses the
6MB working set and varies the length of the input
to be hashed. We can no longer use the special-
ized 12-byte functions, but the other functions are
shown. (We did not implement a generalization of
ourXOR12hashfunction,althoughsuchafunction
would be expected to beat the other hash functions
in the graph.) With short strings, we see the Perl
hash function outperforms its peers. However, with
strings longer than around 44-bytes, UHASH dom-
inates all the other hash functions, due in no small
part to its extensive performance tuning and hand-
coded assembly routines.
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
 120
 140
 1  4  16  64  256  1024
Throughput (MByte/sec)
Input length
Perl
MD5
UHASH
CW
Figure 8: Effect of input length on hash perfor-
mance with a 6MB working set.
We have some preliminary benchmarks with in-
tegrating universal hashing into Perl. We bench-
marked the change with two perl scripts, both of
whichdolittleotherthanhashtableoperations. The
ﬁrst script is a histogramming program, the second
just inserts text into a hash table. Our results in-
dicate that the application performance difference
between UHASH and Perl’s default hash function
is plus or minus 10%.
We conclude that our customized Carter-Wegman
construction, for short ﬁxed-length strings, and
UHASH, for arbitrary strings, are sufﬁciently high
performance that there is no excuse for them not to
beused,oratleastbenchmarked,inproductionsys-
tems. OurcodeisavailableonlinewithaBSD-style
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association 43
license2.
6 Conclusions and future work
We have presented algorithmic complexity attacks,
a new class of low-bandwidth denial of service
attacks. Where traditional DoS attacks focus on
small implementation bugs, such as buffer over-
ﬂows, these attacks focus on inefﬁciencies in the
worst-caseperformanceofalgorithmsusedinmany
mainstream applications. We have analyzed a va-
riety of common applications, ﬁnding weaknesses
which vary from increasing an applications work-
loadbyasmallconstantfactortocausingtheappli-
cation to completely collapse under the load cause
by its algorithm’s unexpectedly bad behavior.
Algorithmic complexity attacks against hash table,
in particular, count on the attacker having sufﬁ-
cient freedom over the space of possible inputs to
ﬁnd a sufﬁcient number of hash collisions to in-
duce worst-case behavior in an application’s hash
table. When the targeted system is processing net-
work packets, the limited address space of IPv4 of-
fers some limited protection against these attacks,
but future IPv6 systems will greatly expand an at-
tacker’s ability to ﬁnd collisions. As such, we
strongly recommend that network packet process-
ing code be audited for these vulnerabilities.
Common applications often choose algorithms
based on their common-case behavior, expecting
the worst-case to never occur in practice. This pa-
per shows that such design choices introduce vul-
nerabilitiesthatcanandshouldbepatchedbyusing
more robust algorithms. We showed how univer-
sal hashing demonstrates impressive performance,
suitable for use in virtually any application.
While this paper has focused on a handful of soft-
waresystems,aninterestingareaforfutureresearch
will be to study the algorithms used by embed-
ded systems, such as routers, ﬁrewalls, and other
networking devices. For example, many “stateful”
2http://www.cs.rice.edu/˜scrosby/hash/
ﬁrewalls likely use simple data structures to store
this state. Anyone who can learn the ﬁrewall’s al-
gorithmsmaybeabletomountDoSattacksagainst
those systems.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully thank John Garvin for his
help in the analysis of the Squid web proxy and
Algis Rudys and David Rawlings for their careful
reading and comments. We also thank David Wag-
ner and Dan Boneh for helpful discussions on uni-
versal hashing.
This work is supported by NSF Grant CCR-
9985332 and Texas ATP grant #03604-0053-2001
and by gifts from Microsoft and Schlumberger.
References
[1] G. M. Adel’son-Vel’skii and Y. M. Landis. An al-
gorithmfortheorganizationofinformation. Soviet
Mathematics Doklady, 3:1259–1262, 1962.
[2] Aleph1. Smashing the stack for fun and
proﬁt. Phrack #49, Nov. 1996. http://www.
phrack.org/show.php?p=49&a=14.
[3] D. J. Bernstein. Floating-point arithmetic and
message authentication. http://cr.yp.to/
papers/hash127.ps, March 2000.
[4] J. Black, S. Halevi, H. Krawczyk, T. Krovetz,
and P. Rogaway. UMAC: Fast and secure
message authentication. In Advances in Cryp-
tology – CRYPTO 99 , pages 215–233, 99.
see also, http://www.cs.ucdavis.edu/
˜rogagay/umac/.
[5] J. L. Carter and M. N. Wegman. Universal classes
ofhashfunctions. Journal of Computer and System
Sciences (JCSS), 18(2):143–154, Apr. 1979.
[6] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, and R. L. Rivest.
Introduction to Algorithms. MIT Electrical Engi-
neering and Computer Science Series. MIT Press,
1990.
[7] P. B. Danzig, R. S. Hall, and M. F. Schwartz. A
case for caching ﬁle objects inside internetworks.
12th USENIX Security Symposium USENIX Association44
In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM ’93 Con-
ference on Communication Architectures, Proto-
cols, and Applications, pages 239–248, San Fran-
cisco, CA, Sept. 1993.
[8] D. Dean and A. Stubbleﬁeld. Using client puz-
zles to protect TLS. In Proceedings of the 10th
USENIX Security Symposium, Washington, D.C.,
Aug. 2001.
[9] C. Dwork and M. Naor. Pricing via processing
or combatting junk mail.Advances in Cryptology
CRYPTO ’92, 740:139–147, August 1992.
[10] S. Garﬁnkel. Script for a king. HotWired Packet,
Nov.1996. http://hotwired.lycos.com/
packet/garfinkel/96/45/geek.html,
and see http://simson.vineyard.net/
table.htmlfor the table attack.
[11] L. J. Guibas and R. Sedgewick. A dichromatic
framework for balanced trees. InProceedings of
19th Foundations of Computer Science , pages 8–
21, 1978.
[12] H. Krawczyk, M. Bellare, and R. Canetti. HMAC:
Keyed-hashing for message authentication. Tech-
nicalReport RFC-2104, InternetEngineering Task
Force, Feb. 1997.ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.
org/in-notes/rfc2104.txt.
[13] S. McCanne and V. Jacobson. The BSD packet ﬁl-
ter: A new architecture for user-level packet cap-
ture. In USENIX Annual Technical Conference ,
pages 259–270, San Diego, California, Jan. 1993.
[14] National Laboratory for Applied Network Re-
search. The Squid Internet object cache.http:
//www.squid-cache.org.
[15] V. Paxson. Bro: a system for detecting network
intrudersinreal-time. Computer Networks,31(23–
24):2435–2463, 1999.
[16] X. Qie, R. Pang, and L. Peterson. Defensive Pro-
gramming: Using an Annotation Toolkit to Build
Dos-Resistant Software. In Proceedings of the
Fifth Symposium on Operating Systems Design
and Implementation,Boston,MAUSA,December
2002.
[17] R. Seidel and C. R. Aragon. Randomized search
trees. Algorithmica, 16(4/5):464–497, 1996.
[18] D. D. Sleator and R. E. Tarjan. Self-adjusting bi-
nary search trees. Journal of the ACM (JACM) ,
32(3):652–686, 1985.
[19] D.-E. C. Smorgrav. YA Apache DoS attack.
Bugtraq mailing list, August 1998. http:
//lists.nas.nasa.gov/archives/
ext/bugtraq/1998/08/msg00060.html.
[20] F. Weimer. Private communication, Apr. 2003.
[21] D. Wessels and K. Claffey. Application of Internet
Cache Protocol (ICP), version 2. Technical Re-
port RFC-2187, Internet Engineering Task Force,
Sept. 1997. ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/
in-notes/rfc2187.txt.