A Dependent Dependency Calculus
Pritam Choudhury1 , Harley Eades III 2
 , and Stephanie Weirich3
1 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA, pritam@seas.upenn.edu
2 Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA
3 University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
Abstract. Over twenty years ago, Abadi et al. established the Depen-
dency Core Calculus (DCC) as a general purpose framework for ana-
lyzing dependency in typed programming languages. Since then, depen-
dency analysis has shown many practical beneﬁts to language design: its
results can help users and compilers enforce security constraints, elim-
inate dead code, among other applications. In this work, we present a
Dependent Dependency Calculus (DDC), which extends this general idea
to the setting of a dependently-typed language. We use this calculus to
track both run-time and compile-time irrelevance, enabling faster type-
checking and program execution.
Keywords: Dependent Types · Information Flow · Irrelevance
1 Dependency Analysis
Consider this judgment from a type system that has been augmented with de-
pendency analysis.
x :L Int, y :H Bool, z :M Bool⊣ if z then x else 3 :M Int
In this judgment,L,M andH stand for low, medium and high security levels
respectively. The computed value of the expression is meant to be a medium-
security result. The inputs, x, y and z have been marked with their respective
security levels. This expression type-checks because it is permissible for medium-
security results to depend on both low and medium-security inputs. Note that
the high-security boolean variable y is not used in the expression. However, if
we replace z with y in the conditional, then the type checker would reject that
expression. Even though the high-security input would not be returned directly,
the medium-security result would still depend on it.
Dependency analysis, as we see above, is an expressive addition to program-
ming languages. Such analyses allow languages to protect sensitive informa-
tion (Smith and Volpano, 1998; Heintze and Riecke, 1998), support run-time code
generation (Thiemann, 1997), slice programs while preserving behavior (Tip,
1995), etc. Several existing dependency analyses were uniﬁed by Abadi et al.
(1999) in their Dependency Core Calculus (DCC). This calculus has served as a
foundation for static analysis of dependencies in programming languages.
2 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
What makes DCC powerful is the parameterization of the type system by a
generic lattice of dependency levels. Dependency analysis, in essence, is about
ensuring secure information ﬂow—that information never ﬂows from more se-
cure to less secure levels. Denning (1976) showed that a lattice model, where
increasing order corresponds to higher security, can be used to enforce secure
ﬂow of information. DCC integrates this lattice model with the computational
λ-calculus (Moggi, 1991) by grading the monad operator of the latter with ele-
ments of the former. This integration enables DCC to analyze dependencies in
its type system.
However, even though many typed languages have included dependency anal-
ysis in some form, this feature has seen relatively little attention in the context
of dependently-typed languages. This is unfortunate because, as we show in this
paper, dependency analysis can provide an elegant foundation for compile-time
and run-time irrelevance, two important concerns in the design of dependently-
typed languages. Compile-time irrelevance identiﬁes sub-expressions that are not
needed for type checking while run-time irrelevance identiﬁes sub-expressions
that do not aﬀect the result of evaluation. By ignoring or erasing such sub-
expressions, compilers for dependently-typed languages increase the expressive-
ness of the type system, improve on compilation time and produce more eﬃcient
executables.
Therefore, in this work, we augment a dependently-typed language with a
primitive notion of dependency analysis and use it to track compile-time and
run-time irrelevance. We call this language DDC, for Dependent Dependency
Calculus, in homage to DCC. Although our dependency analyses are structured
diﬀerently, we show that DDC can faithfully embed the terminating fragment
of DCC and support its many well-known applications, in addition to our novel
application of tracking compile-time and run-time irrelevance.
More speciﬁcally, our work makes the following contributions:
– We design a language SDC, for Simple Dependency Calculus, that can ana-
lyze dependencies in a simply-typed language. We show that SDC is no less
expressive than the terminating fragment of DCC. The structure of depen-
dency analysis in SDC enables a relatively straightforward syntactic proof
of non-interference. (Section 3)
– We extend SDC to a dependent calculus, DDC⊤. Using this calculus, we
analyze run-time irrelevance and show the analysis is correct using a non-
interference theorem. DDC⊤ contains SDC as a sub-language. As such, it
can be used to track other forms of dependencies as well. (Section 4)
– We generalize DDC⊤ to DDC. Using this calculus, we analyze both run-
time and compile-time irrelevance and show that the analyses are correct.
To the best of our knowledge, DDC is the only system that can distinguish
run-time and compile-time irrelevance as separate modalities, necessary for
the proper treatment of projection from irrelevant Σ-types. (Section 5)
– We have used the Coq proof assistant to mechanically verify the most impor-
tant and delicate part of our designs, the non-interference and type sound-
4 https://github.com/sweirich/graded-haskell
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 3
ness theorems for DDC. This mechanization is available online 4 and as a
self-contained artifact (Choudhury et al., 2022a).
2 Irrelevance and Dependent Types
Run-time irrelevance (sometimes called erasure) and compile-time irrelevance
are two forms of dependency analyses that arise in dependent type theories.
Tracking these dependencies helps compilers produce faster executables and
makes type checking more ﬂexible. (Pfenning, 2001; Miquel, 2001; Barras and
Bernardo, 2008; Mishra-Linger and Sheard, 2008; Abel and Scherer, 2012; McBride,
2016; Atkey, 2018; Nuyts and Devriese, 2018; Tejiˇ sˇ c´ ak, 2020; Moon et al., 2021).
2.1 Run-time irrelevance
Parts of a program that are not required during run time are said to be run-
time irrelevant. Our goal is to identify such parts. Let’s consider some examples.
We shall mark variables and arguments with ⊤ if they can be erased prior to
execution and leave them unmarked if they should be preserved.
For example, the polymorphic identity function can be marked as:
id : Π x:⊤Type. x -> x
id = λ⊤x. λy. y
The ﬁrst parameter, x, of the identity function is only needed during type check-
ing; it can be erased before execution. The second parameter, y, though, is
required during runtime. When we apply this function to arguments, as in (id
Bool⊤ True), we can erase the ﬁrst argument, Bool, but the second one, True,
must be retained.
Indexed data structures provide another example of run-time irrelevance.
Consider the Vec datatype for length-indexed vectors, as it might look in a
core language inspired by GHC (Sulzmann et al., 2007; Weirich et al., 2017).
The Vec datatype has two parameters, n and a, that also appear in the types of
the data constructors Nil and Cons. These parameters are relevant to Vec, but
irrelevant to the data constructors. (In the types of the constructors, the equality
constraints (n ∼ Zero) and (n ∼ Succ m) force n to be equal to the length of
the vector.)
Vec : Nat -> Type -> Type
Nil : Π n:⊤Nat. Π a:⊤Type. (n ∼ Zero) => Vec n a
Cons : Π n:⊤Nat. Π a:⊤Type. Π m:⊤Nat. (n ∼ Succ m) => a -> Vec m a
-> Vec n a
Now consider a function vmap that maps a given function over a given vector.
The length of the vector and the type arguments are not necessary for running
vmap; they are all erasable. So we assign them ⊤.
4 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
vmap : Π n:⊤Nat.Π a b:⊤Type. (a -> b) -> Vec n a -> Vec n b
vmap = λ⊤ n a b. λ f xs.
case xs of
Nil -> Nil
Cons m⊤ x xs -> Cons m ⊤ (f x) (vmap m ⊤ a⊤ b⊤ f xs)
Note that the⊤-marked variables m, a and b appear in the deﬁnition of vmap,
but only in ⊤ contexts. By requiring that ‘unmarked’ terms don’t depend on
terms marked with⊤, we can track run-time irrelevance and guarantee safe era-
sure. Observe that even though these arguments are marked with ⊤ to describe
their use in the deﬁnition of vmap, this marking does not reﬂect their usage in
the type of vmap. In particular, we are free to use these variables with Vec in a
relevant manner.
2.2 Compile-time Irrelevance
Some type constructors may have arguments which can be ignored during type
checking. Such arguments are said to be compile-time irrelevant. For example,
suppose we have a constant function that ignores its argument and returns a
type.
phantom : Nat ⊤ -> Type
phantom = λ⊤ x. Bool
To type check idp below, we must show that phantom 0 equals phantom 1 .
Without compile-time irrelevance, we need to β-reduce both sides to show that
the input and output types are equal.
idp : phantom 0 ⊤ -> phantom 1 ⊤
idp = λ x. x
However, in the presence of compile-time irrelevance, we can use the de-
pendency information contained in the type of a function to reason about it
abstractly. Because the function f below ignores its argument, it is sound to
equate the input and output types.
ida : Π f :⊤(Nat⊤ -> Type). f 0 ⊤ -> f 1 ⊤
ida = λ⊤ f. λ x. x
In the absence of compile-time irrelevance, we cannot type-check ida. So
compile-time irrelevance makes type checking more ﬂexible.
Compile-time irrelevance can also make type checking faster when the types
contain expensive computation that can be safely ignored. For example, consider
the following program that type checks without compile-time irrelevance. How-
ever, in that case, the type checker must show that fib 28 reduces to 317811,
where fib represents the Fibonacci function.
idn : Π f :⊤(Nat⊤ -> Type). f (fib 28) ⊤ -> f 317811 ⊤
idn = λ⊤ f. λ x. x
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 5
So far, we have used two annotations on variables and terms:⊤ for irrelevant
ones and ‘unmarked’ for relevant ones. We used⊤ to mark both arguments that
can be erased at runtime and arguments that can be safely ignored by the type
checker. However, sometimes we need a ﬁner distinction.
2.3 Strong Irrelevant Σ-types
Consider the typeΣm:⊤Nat. Vec m a , which contains pairs whose ﬁrst component
is marked as irrelevant. This type might be useful, say, for the output of afilter
function for vectors, where the length of the output vector cannot be calculated
statically. If we never need to use this length at runtime, then it would be good
to mark it with ⊤ so that it need not be stored. 5
However, marking m with⊤ means that the ﬁrst component of the pair of this
type must also be compile-time irrelevant. This results in a signiﬁcant limitation
for strong Σ types: we cannot project the second component from the pair. Say
we have ys:Σm:⊤Nat. Vec m a . The type of ( π1 ys) is a Nat that can only be
used in irrelevant positions. However, note that the argument n in Vec n a must
be compile-time relevant; otherwise the type checker would equate Vec 0 a with
Vec 1 a , making the length index meaningless. The type of ( π2 ys) would then
be Vec (π1 ys) a , which is ill-formed because an irrelevant term (π1 ys) appears
in a relevant position.
Therefore, we don’t want to mark the ﬁrst component of the output offilter
with⊤. However, if we leave it unmarked, we cannot erase it at runtime, some-
thing that we might want to. A way out of this quandry comes by considering
terms that are run-time irrelevant but not compile-time irrelevant. Such terms
exist between completely irrelevant and completely relevant terms. They should
not depend upon irrelevant terms and relevant terms should not depend upon
them. We mark such terms with a new annotation, C, with the constraints that
‘unmarked’ terms do not depend on C andC terms do not depend on ⊤ terms.
The three annotations, then, correspond to the three levels of a lattice modelling
secure information ﬂow, with ⊥ < C <⊤, using ⊥ in lieu of ‘unmarked’. We
call the lattice LI, for irrelevance lattice. Using this lattice, we can type check
the following filter function.
filter : Πn:⊤Nat.Πa:⊤Type.(a -> Bool) -> Vec n a -> Σm:C Nat. Vec m a
filter = λ⊤ n a. λ f vec.
case vec of
Nil -> (Zero C , Nil)
Cons n1⊤ x xs
| f x -> ((Succ ( π1 ys))C , Cons ( π1 ys)⊤ x (π2 ys))
where
ys = filter n1 ⊤ a⊤ f xs
| _ -> filter n1 ⊤ a⊤ f xs
5 It is, however, safe for m to be used in a relevant position in the body of the Σ-type
even when it is marked with ⊤. This marking indicates how the ﬁrst component of
6 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
Eisenberg et al. (2021) observe that, in Haskell, it is important to use pro-
jection functions to access the components of the pair that results from the
recursive call (as in π1 ys and π2 ys) to ensure that filter is not excessively
strict. If filter instead used pattern matching to eliminate the pair returned by
the recursive call, it would have needed to ﬁlter the entire vector before returning
the ﬁrst successful value. This filter function demonstrates the practical utility
of strong irrelevant Σ-types because it supports the same run-time behavior of
the usual list filter function but with a more richly-typed data structure.
3 A Simple Dependency Analyzing Calculus
Our ultimate goal is a dependent dependency calculus. However, we ﬁrst start
with a simply-typed version so that we can explain our approach to dependency
analysis and non-interference in a simpliﬁed setting.
We call the calculus of this section SDC, for Simple Dependency Calculus.
This calculus is parameterized by a lattice of labels or grades, which can also be
thought of as security levels.6 An excerpt of this calculus appears in Figure 1; it
is an extension of the simply-typed λ-calculus with a grade-indexed modal type
T𝓁 A. The modal type T𝓁 A can be thought of as putting a security barrier of
grade 𝓁 around the values of A. The calculus itself is also graded, which means
that in a typing judgment, the derived term and every variable in the context
carries a label or grade. (The speciﬁcation of the full system, which includes unit,
products and sums, appears in the extended version of this paper (Choudhury
et al., 2022b).)
3.1 Type System
The typing judgment has the form Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A which means that “𝓁 is allowed
to observe a” or that “a is visible at 𝓁”. Selected typing rules for SDC appear in
Figure 1. Most rules are straightforward and propagate the level of the sub-terms
to the expression.
The rule SDC-V arrequires that the grade of the variable in the context
must be less than or equal to the grade of the observer. In other words, an
observer at level 𝓁 is allowed to use a variable from level k if and only if k≤𝓁.
If the variable’s level is too high, then this rule does not apply, ensuring that
information can always ﬂow to more secure levels but never to less secure ones.
Abstraction rule SDC-Abs uses the current level of the expression for the newly
introduced variable in the context. This makes sense because the argument to
the function is checked at the same level in rule SDC-App.
The modal type, introduced and eliminated with rule SDC-Return and
rule SDC-Bind respectively, manipulates the levels. The former says that, if
a pair having this type is used, not how the bound variable m is used in the body of
the type.
6 We use the terms label, level and grade interchangeably.
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 7
(Grammar)
labels 𝓁,k ::=⊥|⊤| k∧𝓁|k∨𝓁|...
types A , B ::= Unit| A→ B|T 𝓁 A
terms a , b ::= x|λx : A.a| a b variables and functions
| η𝓁 a| bind𝓁 x = a in b graded modality
contextsΩ ::= ∅|Ω, x :𝓁 A
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A (Typing rules)
SDC-V ar
𝓁0≤𝓁 x :𝓁0 A∈Ω
Ω⊣ x :𝓁 A
SDC-Abs
Ω, x :𝓁 A⊣ b :𝓁 B
Ω⊣ λx : A.b :𝓁 A→ B
SDC-App
Ω⊣ b :𝓁 A→ B
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A
Ω⊣ b a :𝓁 B
SDC-Return
Ω⊣ a :𝓁∨𝓁0 A
Ω⊣ η𝓁0 a :𝓁 T 𝓁0 A
SDC-Bind
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 T 𝓁0 A
Ω, x :𝓁∨𝓁0 A⊣ b :𝓁 B
Ω⊣ bind𝓁0 x = a in b :𝓁 B
a ; a′ (Small step)
SDCStep-Beta
(λx :𝓁 A.a) b𝓁 ; a{b/x}
SDCStep-BindBeta
bind𝓁 x =η𝓁 a in b ; b{a/x}
Fig. 1. Simple Dependency Calculus (Excerpt)
a term is ( 𝓁∨𝓁0)-secure, then we can put it in an 𝓁0-secure box and release
it at level 𝓁. An 𝓁0-secure boxed term can be unboxed only by someone who
has security clearance for 𝓁0, as we see in the latter rule. The join operation in
rule SDC-Bind ensures that b can depend on a only if b itself is 𝓁0-secure or
𝓁0≤𝓁.
3.2 Meta-theoretic Properties
This type system satisﬁes the following properties related to levels.
First, we can always weaken our assumptions about the variables in the
context. If a term is derivable with an assumption held at some grade, then that
term is also derivable with that assumption held at any lower grade. Below, for
any two contextsΩ1,Ω 2, we say that Ω1≤Ω2 iﬀ they are the same modulo the
grades and further, for any x, if x :𝓁1 A∈Ω1 and x :𝓁2 A∈Ω2, then 𝓁1≤𝓁2.
Lemma 1 (Narrowing). If Ω′⊣ a :𝓁 A and Ω≤Ω′, then Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A.
Narrowing says that we can always downgrade any variable in the context.
Conversely, we cannot upgrade context variables in general, but we can upgrade
them to the level of the judgment.
Lemma 2 (Restricted Upgrading). If Ω1, x :𝓁0 A,Ω 2⊣ b :𝓁 B and 𝓁1≤ 𝓁,
then Ω1, x :𝓁0∨𝓁1 A,Ω 2⊣ b :𝓁 B.
8 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
The restricted upgrading lemma is needed to show subsumption. Subsump-
tion states that, if a term is visible at some grade, then it is also visible at all
higher grades.
Lemma 3 (Subsumption). If Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A and 𝓁≤k, then Ω⊣ a :k A.
Subsumption is necessary (along with a standard weakening lemma) to show
that substitution holds for this language. For substitution, we need to ensure
that the level of the variable matches up with that of the substituted expression.
Lemma 4 (Substitution). If Ω1, x :𝓁0 A,Ω 2⊣ b :𝓁 B and Ω1⊣ a :𝓁0 A, then
Ω1,Ω 2⊣ b{a/x} :𝓁 B.
SDC terms are reduced using a call-by-name strategy. An excerpt of the
small-step semantics appears in Figure 1. Note how the labels on the introduction
form and the corresponding elimination form match up in rules SDCStep-Beta
and SDCStep-BindBeta. Further, note that we could have also used a call-by-
value strategy to reduce SDC terms; we chose a call-by-name strategy because
our development is motivated by potential applications in Haskell.
For a call-by-name operational semantics, the above lemmas allow us to
prove, a standard progress and preservation based type soundness result, which
we omit here.
Next, we show that our type system is secure by proving non-interference.
3.3 A Syntactic Proof of Non-interference
When users with low-security clearance are oblivious to high-security data, we
say that the system enjoys non-interference. Non-interference results from level-
speciﬁc views of the world. The values ηH T rueandηH F alseappear the same
to an L-user while an H-user can diﬀerentiate between them. To capture this
notion of a level-speciﬁc view, we design an indexed equivalence relation on open
terms,∼𝓁, called indexed indistinguishability, and shown in Figure 2. To deﬁne
this relation, we need the labels of the variables in the context but not their
types. So, we use grade-only contexts Φ, deﬁned as Φ ::= ∅| Φ, x : 𝓁. These
contexts are like graded contexts Ω without the type information on variables,
also denoted by|Ω|.
Informally,Φ⊣ a∼𝓁 b means that a and b appear the same to an 𝓁-user. For
example, ηH T rue∼L ηH F alsebut¬(ηH T rue∼H ηH F alse). We deﬁne this
relation∼𝓁 by structural induction on terms. We think of terms as ASTs anno-
tated at various nodes with labels, say 𝓁0, that determine whether an observer
𝓁 is allowed to look at the corresponding sub-tree. If 𝓁0≤𝓁, then observer 𝓁 can
start exploring the sub-tree; otherwise the entire sub-tree appears as a blob. So
we can also read Φ⊣ a∼𝓁 b as: “a is syntactically equal to b at all parts of the
terms marked with any label 𝓁0, where 𝓁0≤𝓁, but may be arbitrarily diﬀerent
elsewhere.”
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 9
Φ⊣ a∼𝓁 b (Indexed Indistinguishability)
SGEq-V ar
x :𝓁0 inΦ 𝓁 0≤𝓁
Φ⊣ x∼𝓁 x
SGEq-Abs
Φ, x :𝓁⊣ b1∼𝓁 b2
Φ⊣λx : A.b1∼𝓁 λx : A.b2
SGEq-App
Φ⊣ b1∼𝓁 b2
Φ⊣ a1∼𝓁 a2
Φ⊣ b1 a1∼𝓁 b2 a2
SGEq-Return
Φ⊣𝓁0
𝓁 a1∼ a2
Φ⊣η𝓁0 a1∼𝓁 η𝓁0 a2
SGEq-Bind
Φ⊣ a1∼𝓁 a2
Φ, x :𝓁0∨𝓁⊣ b1∼𝓁 b2
Φ⊣ bind𝓁0 x = a1 in b1∼𝓁 bind𝓁0 x = a2 in b2
Φ⊣𝓁0
𝓁 a1∼ a2
SEq-Leq
𝓁0≤𝓁 Φ ⊣ a1∼𝓁 a2
Φ⊣𝓁0
𝓁 a1∼ a2
SEq-Nleq
¬(𝓁0≤𝓁)
Φ⊣𝓁0
𝓁 a1∼ a2
Fig. 2. Indexed indistiguishability for SDC (Excerpt)
Note the rule SGEq-Return in Figure 2. It uses an auxiliary relation,Φ⊣𝓁0
𝓁
a1∼ a2. This auxiliary extended equivalence relation Φ⊣𝓁0
𝓁 a1∼ a2 formalizes
the idea discussed above: if 𝓁0≤𝓁, then a1 and a2 must be indistinguishable at
𝓁; otherwise, they may be arbitrary terms.
Now, we explore some properties of the indistinguishability relation. 7
If we remove the second component from an indistinguishability relation, Φ⊣
a∼𝓁 b, we get a new judgment, Φ⊣ a : 𝓁, called grading judgment. Now, cor-
responding to every indistinguishability rule, we deﬁne a grading rule where the
indistinguishability judgments have been replaced with their grading counter-
parts. Terms derived using these grading rules are called well-graded. We can
show that well-typed terms are well-graded.
Lemma 5 (Typing implies grading). If Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A then|Ω|⊣ a :𝓁.
Lemma 6 (Equivalence). Indexed indistinguishability at 𝓁 is an equivalence
relation on well-graded terms at 𝓁.
The above lemma shows that indistinguishability is an equivalence relation.
Observe that at the highest element of the lattice,⊤, this equivalence degenerates
to the identity relation.
Indistinguishability is closed under extended equivalence. The following is like a
substitution lemma for the relation.
7 Because this relation is untyped, its analogue for DDC is similar. For each lemma
below, we include a reference to the location in the Coq development where it may
10 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
Lemma 7 (Indistinguishability under substitution). If Φ, x :𝓁⊣ b1∼k b2
and Φ⊣𝓁
k a1∼ a2 then Φ⊣ b1{a1/x}∼ k b2{a2/x}.
With regard to the above lemma, consider the situation when ¬(𝓁≤k), for
example, when 𝓁 = H and k = L. In such a situation, for any two terms a1
and a2, if Φ, x :𝓁⊣ b1∼k b2, then Φ⊣ b1{a1/x}∼ k b2{a2/x}. Let us work out
a concrete example. For a typing derivation x :H A⊣ b :L Bool, we have, by
lemmas 5 and 6, x :H⊣ b∼L b. Then, ∅⊣ b{a1/x}∼ L b{a2/x}. This is almost
non-interference in action. What’s left to show is that the indistinguishability
relation respects the small step semantics, written a1 ; a2. The small-step
relation is standard call-by-name reduction.
Theorem 1 (Non-interference). If Φ⊣ a1∼k a′
1 and a 1 ; a2 then there
exists some a′
2 such that a′
1 ; a′
2 and Φ⊣ a2∼k a′
2.
Since the step relation is deterministic, in the above lemma, there is exactly
one such a′
2 that a′
1 steps to. Now, going back to our last example, we see that
b{a1/x} and b{a2/x} take steps in tandem and they are L-indistinguishable
after each and every step. Since the language itself is terminating, both the terms
reduce to boolean values, values that are themselves L-indistinguishable as well.
But the indistinguishability for boolean values is just the identity relation. This
means that b{a1/x} and b{a2/x} reduce to the same value.
The indistinguishability relation gives us a syntactic method of proving non-
interference for programs derived in SDC. Essentially, we show that a user with
low-security clearance cannot distinguish between high security values just by
observing program behavior.
Next, we show that SDC is no less expressive than the terminating fragment of
DCC.
3.4 Relation with Sealing Calculus and Dependency Core Calculus
SDC is extremely similar to the sealing calculus λ[] of Shikuma and Igarashi
(2006). Like SDC, λ[] has a label on the typing judgment. 8 But unlike SDC, λ[]
uses standard ungraded typing contextsΓ . Both the calculi have the same types.
As far as terms are concerned, there is only one diﬀerence. The sealing calculus
has an unseal term whereas SDC uses bind. We present the rules for sealing
and unsealing terms in λ[] below.9
Sealing-Seal
Γ⊣ a :𝓁∨𝓁0 A
Γ⊣η𝓁0 a :𝓁 T𝓁0 A
Sealing-Unseal
Γ⊣ a :𝓁 T𝓁0 A
𝓁0≤𝓁
Γ⊣ unseal𝓁0a :𝓁 A
be found for the dependent system.
8 Note that our labels correspond to observer levels of Shikuma and Igarashi (2006),
which can be viewed as a lattice.
9 We take the liberty of making small cosmetic changes in the presentation.
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 11
Shikuma and Igarashi (2006) have shown that λ[] is equivalent to DCC pc,
an extension of the terminating fragment of DCC. Therefore, we compare SDC
to DCC by simulating λ[] in SDC. For this, we deﬁne a translation ¯·, from λ[]
to SDC. Most of the cases are handled inductively in a straightforward manner.
For unseal, we have, unseal𝓁a := bind𝓁 x = a in x.
With this translation, we can give a forward and a backward simulation
connecting the two languages. The reduction relation ; below is full reduction
for both the languages, the reduction strategy used by Shikuma and Igarashi
(2006) for λ[]. Full reduction is a non-deterministic reduction strategy whereby
a β-redex in any sub-term may be reduced.
Theorem 2 (F orward Simulation). If a ; a′ in λ[], then a ; a′ in SDC.
Theorem 3 (Backward Simulation). For any term a in λ[], if a ; b in
SDC, then there exists a ′ in λ[] such that b = a′ and a ; a′.
The translation also preserves typing. In fact, a source term and its target
have the same type. Below, for an ordinary context Γ , the graded context Γ𝓁
denotes Γ with the labels for all the variables set to 𝓁.
Theorem 4 (T ranslation Preserves Typing). If Γ⊣ a :𝓁 A, then Γ𝓁⊣ a :𝓁
A.
The above translation shows that the terminating fragment of DCC can be
embedded into SDC. Therefore SDC is at least as expressive as the terminating
fragment of DCC. Further, SDC lends itself nicely to syntactic proof techniques
for non-interference. This approach generalizes to more expressive systems, as
we shall see in the next section, where we extend SDC to a general dependent
dependency calculus.
4 A Dependent Dependency Analyzing Calculus
a, A, b, B ::= s| unit| Unit sorts and unit
| Πx :𝓁 A.B| x|λx :𝓁 A.a| a b 𝓁 dependent functions
| Σx:𝓁A.B| (a 𝓁, b)| let (x 𝓁, y) = a in b dependent pairs
| A + B| inj1 a| inj2 a| case a of b1; b2 disjoint unions
Fig. 3. Dependent Dependency Calculus Grammar (Types and Terms)
Here and in the next section, we present dependently-typed languages, with
dependency analysis in the style of SDC. The ﬁrst extension, called DDC⊤ is a
straightforward integration of labels and dependent types. This system subsumes
12 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
SDC, and so can be used for the same purposes. Here, we show how it can be used
to analyze run-time irrelevance. Then, in Section 5, we generalize this system to
DDC, which allows deﬁnitional equality to ignore unnecessary sub-terms, thus
also enabling compile-time irrelevance. We present the system in this way both
to simplify the presentation and to show that DDC⊤ is an intermediate point
in the design space.
Both DDC⊤ and DDC are pure type systems (Barendregt, 1993). They share
the same syntax, shown in Figure 3, combining terms and types into the same
grammar. They are parameterized by a set of sorts s, a set of axioms A(s1, s2)
which is a binary relation on sorts, and a set of rules R(s1, s2, s3) which is a
ternary relation on sorts. For simplicity, we assume, without loss of generality,
that for every sort s1, there is some sort s2, such thatA(s1, s2).10
We annotate several syntactic forms with grades for dependency analysis. The
dependent function type, written Πx :𝓁 A.B, includes the grade of the argument
to a function having this type. Similarly, the dependent pair type, written Σx:𝓁
A.B, includes the grade of the ﬁrst component of a pair having this type. 11
We can interpret these types as a fusion of the usual, ungraded dependent types
and the graded modality T𝓁 A we saw earlier. In other words, Πx :𝓁 A.B acts
like the type Πy : (T𝓁 A).bind x = y in B and Σx :𝓁 A.B acts like the type
Σy : (T𝓁 A).bind x = y in B. Because of this fusion, we do not need to add the
graded modality type as a separate form—we can deﬁne T𝓁 A as Σx:𝓁A.Unit.
Using Πx :𝓁 A.B instead of Πy : (T𝓁 A).bind x = y in B has an advantage: the
former allows x to be held at diﬀering grades while type checking B and the
body of a function having this Π-type while the latter requires x to be held at
the same grade in both the cases. We utilize this ﬂexibility in Section 5.
4.1 DDC ⊤ : Π-types
The core typing rules for DDC⊤ appear in Figure 4. As in the simple type sys-
tem, the variables in the context are labelled and the judgement itself includes
a label 𝓁. Rule DCT-V aris similar to its counterpart in the simply-typed lan-
guage: the variable being observed must be graded less than or equal to the level
of the observer. Rule DCT-Pi propagates the level of the expression to the sub-
terms of the Π-type. Note that this type is annotated with an arbitrary label
𝓁0: the purpose of this label 𝓁0 is to denote the level at which the argument to
a function having this type may be used.
In rule DCT-Abs, the parameter of the function is introduced into the con-
text at level 𝓁0∨𝓁 (akin to rule SDC-Bind). In rule DCT-App, the argument
10 This assumption does not lead to any loss in generality because given a pure type
system ( S′, A′, R′) that does not meet the above condition, we can provide an-
other pure type system ( S′′, A′′, R′′), where S′′ = S′∪{ D} (given D /∈ S′) and
A′′ = A′∪{ (s, D)|s∈ S′′} and R′′ = R′, such that there exists a straightforward
bisimulation between the two systems.
11 We use standard abbreviations whenx is not free inB: we write 𝓁A→ B forΠx :𝓁 A.B
and 𝓁A× B for Σx:𝓁A.B.
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 13
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A (Typing)
DCT-V ar
𝓁0≤𝓁 x :𝓁0 A∈Ω
Ω⊣ x :𝓁 A
DCT-Type
A(s1, s2)
Ω⊣ s1 :𝓁 s2
DCT-Pi
Ω⊣ A :𝓁 s1
Ω, x :𝓁 A⊣ B :𝓁 s2 R(s1, s2, s3)
Ω⊣Πx :𝓁0 A.B :𝓁 s3
DCT-Abs
Ω, x :𝓁0∨𝓁 A⊣ b :𝓁 B
Ω⊣ (Πx :𝓁0 A.B) :⊤ s
Ω⊣λx :𝓁0 A.b :𝓁 Πx :𝓁0 A.B
DCT-App
Ω⊣ b :𝓁 Πx :𝓁0 A.B
Ω⊣ a :𝓁0∨𝓁 A
Ω⊣ b a 𝓁0 :𝓁 B{a/x}
DCT-Conv
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A
|Ω|⊣ A≡⊤ B
Ω⊣ B :⊤ s
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 B
Fig. 4. DDC⊤ type system (core rules)
to the function is checked at level 𝓁0∨𝓁 (akin to rule SDC-Return). Note that
theΠ-type is checked at⊤ in rule DCT-Abs. In DDC⊤, level⊤ corresponds to
‘compile time’ observers and motivates the superscript⊤ in the language name.
Rule DCT-Conv converts the type of an expression to an equivalent type.
The judgment |Ω|⊣ A≡⊤ B is a label-indexed deﬁnitional equality relation
instantiated to⊤. This relation is the closure of the indexed indistinguishability
relation (Section 3.3) under small-step call-by-name evaluation. When instanti-
ated to⊤, the relation degenerates to β-equivalence. So the rule DCT-Conv is
essentially casting a term to a β-equivalent type; however, in the next section,
we utilize the ﬂexibility of label-indexing to cast a term to a type that may not
be β-equivalent. Also, note that the equality relation itself is untyped. As such,
we need the third premise to guarantee that the new type is well-formed.
4.2 DDC ⊤ : Σ-types
The language DDC⊤ includes Σ types, as speciﬁed by the rules below.
DCT-WSigma
Ω⊣ A :𝓁 s1
Ω, x :𝓁 A⊣ B :𝓁 s2 R(s1, s2, s3)
Ω⊣Σx:𝓁0A.B :𝓁 s3
DCT-WPair
Ω⊣ a :𝓁0∨𝓁 A
Ω⊣ b :𝓁 B{a/x} Ω⊣Σx:𝓁0A.B :⊤ s
Ω⊣ (a𝓁0, b) :𝓁 Σx:𝓁0A.B
LikeΠ-types, Σ-types include a grade that is not related to how the bound
variable is used in the body of the type. The grade indicates the level at which
the ﬁrst component of a pair having the Σ-type may be used. In rule DCT-
WPair, we check the ﬁrst component a of the pair at a level raised by 𝓁0, the
level annotating the type, akin to rule SDC-Return. The second component b
is checked at the current level.
14 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
DCT-LetPair
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 Σx:𝓁0A.B
Ω, x :𝓁0∨𝓁 A, y :𝓁 B⊣ c :𝓁 C{(x𝓁0, y)/z} Ω, z :⊤ (Σx:𝓁0A.B)⊣ C :⊤ s
Ω⊣ let (x𝓁0, y) = a in c :𝓁 C{a/z}
The rule DCT-LetPair eliminates pairs using dependently-typed pattern
matching. The pattern variables x and y are introduced into the context while
checking the body c. Akin to rule SDC-Bind, the level of the ﬁrst pattern
variable, x, is raised by 𝓁0. The result type C is reﬁned by the pattern match,
informing the type system that the pattern ( x𝓁0, y) is equal to the scrutinee a.
Because of this reﬁnement in the result type, we can deﬁne the projection
operations through pattern matching. In particular, the ﬁrst projection,π𝓁0
1 a :=
let (x𝓁0, y) = a in x while the second projection,π𝓁0
2 a := let (x𝓁0, y) = a in y.
These projections can be type checked according to the following derived rules:
DCT-Proj1
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 Σx:𝓁0A.B 𝓁0≤𝓁
Ω⊣π𝓁0
1 a :𝓁 A
DCT-Proj2
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 Σx:𝓁0A.B
Ω⊣π𝓁0
2 a :𝓁 B{π𝓁0
1 a/x}
Note that the derived rule DCT-Proj1 limits access to the ﬁrst component
through the premise𝓁0≤𝓁, akin to rule Sealing-Unseal. This condition makes
sense because it aligns the observability of the ﬁrst component of the pair with
the label on the Σ-type.
4.3 Embedding SDC into DDC ⊤
Here, we show how to embed SDC into DDC⊤.
We deﬁne a translation function, ·, that takes the types and terms in SDC
to terms in DDC⊤. For types, the translation is deﬁned as: A→ B :=⊥A→ B,
A× B :=⊥A×B andT𝓁 A :=Σx:𝓁A.Unit. For terms, the translation is straight-
forward except for the following cases:η𝓁 a := (a
𝓁
, unit) and bind𝓁 x = a in b :=
let (x𝓁, y) = a in b, where y is a fresh variable. By lifting the translation to
contexts, we show that translation preserves typing.
Theorem 5 (T rans. Preserves Typing). If Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A, then Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A.
Next, assuming a standard call-by-name small-step semantics for both the
languages, we can provide a bisimulation.
Theorem 6 (F orward Simulation). If a ; a′ in SDC, then a ; a′ in
DDC⊤.
Theorem 7 (Backward Simulation). For any term a in SDC, if a ; b in
DDC⊤, then there exists a ′ in SDC such that b = a′ and a ; a′.
Hence, SDC can be embedded into DDC⊤, preserving meaning. As such,
DDC⊤ can analyze dependencies in general.
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 15
4.4 Run-time Irrelevance
Next, we show how to track run-time irrelevance using DDC⊤. We use the two
element lattice{⊥,⊤} with⊥ <⊤ such that⊥ and⊤ correspond to run-time
relevant and run-time irrelevant terms respectively. So, we need to erase terms
marked with⊤. However, we ﬁrst deﬁne a general indexed erasure function,⌊·⌋𝓁,
on DDC⊤ terms, that erases everything an𝓁-user should not be able to see. The
function is deﬁned by straightforward recursion in most cases. For example,
⌊x⌋𝓁 := x and⌊Πx :𝓁0 A.B⌋𝓁 :=Πx :𝓁0⌊A⌋𝓁.⌊B⌋𝓁 and⌊λ𝓁0x.b⌋𝓁 :=λ𝓁0x.⌊b⌋𝓁.
The interesting cases are:
⌊b a𝓁0⌋𝓁 := (⌊b⌋𝓁⌊a⌋𝓁0
𝓁 ) if 𝓁0≤𝓁 and (⌊b⌋𝓁 unit𝓁0) otherwise,
⌊(a𝓁0, b)⌋𝓁 := (⌊a⌋𝓁0
𝓁 ,⌊b⌋𝓁) if 𝓁0≤𝓁 and (unit𝓁0,⌊b⌋𝓁) otherwise.
They are so deﬁned because if ¬(𝓁0≤𝓁), an 𝓁-user should not be able to see a,
so we replace it with unit.
This erasure function is closely related to the indistinguishability relation,
we saw in Section 3.3, extended to a dependent setting. (This deﬁnition appears
in the extended version of this paper (Choudhury et al., 2022b).) The erasure
function maps the equivalence classes formed by the indistinguishability relation
to their respective canonical elements. We have veriﬁed the following lemmas
using the Coq proof assistant. Footnotes mark the ﬁle and lemma name of the
corresponding mechanized results.
Lemma 8 (Canonical Element 12). If Φ⊣ a1∼𝓁 a2, then⌊a1⌋𝓁 =⌊a2⌋𝓁.
Further, a well-graded term and its erasure are indistinguishable.
Lemma 9 (Erasure Indistinguishability 13). If Φ⊣ a : 𝓁, then Φ⊣ a ∼𝓁
⌊a⌋𝓁.
Next, we can show that erased terms simulate the reduction behavior of their
unerased counterparts.
Lemma 10 (Erasure Simulation 14). If Φ⊣ a : 𝓁 and a ; b, then ⌊a⌋𝓁 ;
⌊b⌋𝓁. Otherwise, if a is a value, then so is ⌊a⌋𝓁.
This lemma follows from Lemma 9 and the non-interference theorem (Theo-
rem 1). Therefore, it is safe to erase, before run time, all sub-terms marked with
⊤.
This shows that we can correctly analyze run-time irrelevance using DDC⊤.
However, supporting compile-time irrelevance requires some changes to the sys-
tem. We take them up in the next section.
12 erasure.v:Canonical element. 13 erasure.v:Erasure Indistinguishability
14 erasure.v:Step erasure,Value erasure
16 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
5 DDC: Run-time and Compile-time Irrelevance
5.1 T owards Compile-time Irrelevance
Recall that terms which may be safely ignored while checking for type equality
are said to be compile-time irrelevant. In DDC⊤, the conversion rule DCT-
Conv checks for type equality at⊤.
DCT-Conv
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A |Ω|⊣ A≡⊤ B Ω⊣ B :⊤ s
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 B
The equality judgment used in this rule Φ⊣ a≡⊤ b is an instantiation of the
general judgment Φ⊣ a≡𝓁 b, which is the closure of the indistinguishability re-
lation at𝓁 underβ-equivalence. When𝓁 is⊤, indistinguishability is just identity.
As such, the equality relation at ⊤ degenerates to standard β-equivalence. So,
rule DCT-Conv does not ignore any part of the terms when checking for type
equality.
To support compile-time irrelevance then, we need the conversion rule to
use equality at some grade strictly less than ⊤ so that⊤-marked terms may be
ignored. For the irrelevance latticeLI, the level C can be used for this purpose.
For any other lattice L, we can add two new elements, C and⊤, above every
other existing element, such thatL<C <⊤, and thereafter use level C for this
purpose. So, for any lattice, we can support compile-time irrelevance by equating
types at C.
Referring back to the examples in Section 2.2, note that for phantom :
Nat⊤ -> Type , we have phantom 0⊤≡C phantom 1⊤. With this equality, we can
type-check idp : phantom 0 ⊤ -> phantom 1 ⊤ = λ x. x , even without knowing
the deﬁnition of phantom.
Now, observe that in rule DCT-Conv, the new type B is also checked at
⊤. If we want to check for type equality at C, we need to make sure that the
types themselves are checked at C. However, checking types at C would rule
out variables marked at⊤ from appearing in them. This would restrict us from
expressing many examples, including the polymorphic identity function.
To move out of this impasse, we take inspiration from EPTS (Mishra-Linger
and Sheard, 2008; Mishra-Linger, 2008). The key idea, adapted from Mishra-
Linger and Sheard (2008), is to use a judgment of the form C∧Ω⊣ a :C A
instead of a judgment of the form Ω⊣ a :⊤ A. The operation C∧Ω takes the
point-wise meet of the labels in the context Ω with C, essentially reducing any
label marked as ⊤ to C, making it available for use in a C-expression. This
operation, called truncation, makes ⊤ marked variables available at C. Other
systems also use similar mechanisms for tracking irrelevance — for example,
we can see a relation between this idea and analogous ones in Pfenning (2001)
and Abel and Scherer (2012). In these systems, “context resurrection” operation
makes proof variables and irrelevant variables in the context available for use,
similar to how C∧Ω makes⊤-marked variables in the context available for use.
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 17
5.2 DDC: Basics
Next, we design a general dependency analyzing calculus, DDC, that takes ad-
vantage of compile-time irrelevance in its type system. DDC is a generalization
of DDC⊤ and EPTS• (Mishra-Linger and Sheard, 2008). When C equals⊤,
DDC degenerates to DDC⊤, that does not use compile-time irrelevance. When
C equals⊥, DDC degenerates to EPTS•, that identiﬁes compile-time and run-
time irrelevance. A crucial distinction between EPTS • and DDC is that while
the former is tied to a two element lattice, the latter can use any lattice. Thus,
not only can DDC distinguish between run-time and compile-time irrelevance,
but also it can simultaneously track other dependencies.
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A ( DDC core typing rules)
T-V ar
𝓁0≤𝓁
x :𝓁0 A∈Ω 𝓁 ≤C
Ω⊣ x :𝓁 A
T-Type
𝓁≤C A(s1, s2)
Ω⊣ s1 :𝓁 s2
T-Pi
Ω⊣ A :𝓁 s1
Ω, x :𝓁 A⊣ B :𝓁 s2
R(s1, s2, s3)
Ω⊣Πx :𝓁0 A.B :𝓁 s3
T-AbsC
Ω, x :𝓁0∨𝓁 A⊣ b :𝓁 B
Ω ⊩ (Πx :𝓁0 A.B) :⊤ s
Ω⊣λx :𝓁0 A.b :𝓁 Πx :𝓁0 A.B
T-AppC
Ω⊣ b :𝓁 Πx :𝓁0 A.B
Ω ⊩ a :𝓁0∨𝓁 A
Ω⊣ b a 𝓁0 :𝓁 B{a/x}
T-ConvC
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A
|C∧Ω|⊣ A≡C B
Ω ⊩ B :⊤ s
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 B
Ω ⊩ a :𝓁 A (Truncate at⊤)
CT-Leq
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A 𝓁≤C
Ω ⊩ a :𝓁 A
CT-Top
C∧Ω⊣ a :C A C <𝓁
Ω ⊩ a :𝓁 A
Fig. 5. Dependent type system with compile-time irrelevance (core rules)
The core typing rules of DDC appear in Figure 5. Compared to DDC⊤,
this type system maintains the invariant that for any Ω ⊣ a :𝓁 A, we have
𝓁≤ C. To ensure that this is the case, rule T-Type and rule T-V arinclude
this precondition. This restriction means that we cannot really derive any term
at⊤ in DDC. We can get around this restriction by deriving C∧Ω⊣ a :C A in
place of Ω⊣ a :⊤ A.
Wherever DDC⊤ uses⊤ as the observer level on a typing judgment, DDC
uses truncation and level C instead. If DDC⊤ uses some grade other than ⊤
as the observer level, DDC leaves the derivation as such. So a DDC⊤ judgment
18 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A is replaced with a truncated-at-top judgment, Ω ⊩ a :𝓁 A which can
be read as: if 𝓁 =⊤, use the truncated version C∧Ω⊣ a :C A; otherwise use
the normal version Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A, as we see in Figure 5. In the typing rules, uses of
this new judgment have been highlighted in gray to emphasize the modiﬁcation
with respect to DDC⊤.
5.3 Π-types
Rule T-Pi is unchanged. The lambda rule T-AbsC now checks the type at C
after truncating the variables in the context toC. The application rule T-AppC
checks the argument using the truncated-at-top judgment. Note that if 𝓁0 =⊤,
the term a can depend upon any variable in Ω. Such a dependence is allowed
since information can always ﬂow from relevant to irrelevant contexts.
To see how irrelevance works in this system, let’s consider the deﬁnition and
use of the polymorphic identity function.
id : Π x:⊤Type. x -> x
id = λ⊤x. λ y. y
In DDC⊤, the type Π x:⊤Type. x -> x is checked at ⊤. However, here it
must be checked at level C, which requires the premise x:C Type ⊣ x -> x : C
Type. Note that if we used the same grade for the bound variable x in rule T-Pi
and rule T-AbsC, we would have been in trouble because variable x is compile-
time relevant while we check the type, even though it is irrelevant in the term.15
Finally, observe that rule T-ConvC uses the deﬁnitional equality at C in-
stead of⊤ and that the new type is checked after truncation.
5.4 Σ-types
T-WPairC
Ω ⊩ a :𝓁0∨𝓁 A
Ω⊣ b :𝓁 B{a/x}
Ω ⊩Σx:𝓁0A.B :⊤ s
Ω⊣ (a𝓁0, b) :𝓁 Σx:𝓁0A.B
T-LetPairC
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 Σx:𝓁0A.B
Ω, x :𝓁0∨𝓁 A, y :𝓁 B⊣ c :𝓁 C{(x𝓁0, y)/z}
Ω, z :⊤ (Σx:𝓁0A.B) ⊩ C :⊤ s
Ω⊣ let (x𝓁0, y) = a in c :𝓁 C{a/z}
We also need to modify the typing rules forΣ types accordingly. In particular,
when we create a pair, we check the ﬁrst component using the truncated-at-top
judgment. This is akin to how we check the argument in ruleT-AppC. Note that
if 𝓁0 =⊤, the ﬁrst component a is compile-time irrelevant. In such a situation,
we cannot type-check the second projection since it requires the ﬁrst projection,
as we see in the derived16 projection rules below. So pairs having type Σx:⊤A.B
15 This is why we fuse the graded modality with the dependent types. If they were
separated, and we had to bind here, it would be a problem since a dependent function
and its type have diﬀerent restrictions vis-` a-vis the bound variable.
16 strong exists.v:T wproj1,T wproj2
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 19
can only be eliminated via pattern matching if B mentions x. However, pairs
having type Σx:CA.B can be eliminated via projections.
For example, for an output of the filter function, ys :Σm:C Nat. Vec m Bool ,
we haveπ1 ys :C Nat andπ2 ys : Vec ( π1 ys) Bool . Note that (π1 ys) is visible
atC and is used in the type of (π2 ys). We can substitute (π1 ys) for m in (Vec m
Bool) because m : C Nat ⊣ Vec m Bool :C Type. However, (π1 ys) cannot be used
at⊥, so it will be erasable then.
T-Proj1
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 (x:𝓁0A) &B 𝓁0≤𝓁
Ω⊣π𝓁0
1 a :𝓁 A
T-Proj2C
Ω⊣ a :𝓁 Σx:𝓁0A.B 𝓁0≤C
Ω⊣π𝓁0
2 a :𝓁 B{π𝓁0
1 a/x}
5.5 Non-interference
DDC satisﬁes an analogous noninterference theorem to the one presented for
SDC, using suitable deﬁnitions for the grading relation, written Φ⊣ a : 𝓁, and
indexed indistiguishability , written Φ ⊣ b1 ∼𝓁 b2. The complete deﬁnition of
these judgements appears in the extended version of this paper (Choudhury
et al., 2022b).
Lemma 11 (Typing implies grading 17). If Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A then|Ω|⊣ a :𝓁.
Lemma 12 (Equivalence 18). Indexed indistinguishability at 𝓁 is an equiva-
lence relation on well-graded terms at 𝓁.
Lemma 13 (Indistinguishability under substitution 19). IfΦ, x :𝓁⊣ b1∼k
b2 and Φ⊣𝓁
k a1∼ a2 then Φ⊣ b1{a1/x}∼ k b2{a2/x}.
Theorem 8 (Non-interference for DDC 20). If Φ⊣ a1∼k a′
1 and a 1 ; a2
then there exists some a ′
2 such that a′
1 ; a′
2 and Φ⊣ a2∼k a′
2.
5.6 Consistency of Equality
The equality relation of DDC incorporates compile-time irrelevance. To show
that the type system is sound, we need to show that the equality relation is
consistent. Consistency of deﬁnitional equality means that there is no derivation
that equates two types having diﬀerent head forms. For example, it should not
equate Nat with Unit.
Note that if ⊤ inputs can interfere with C outputs, the equality relation
cannot be consistent. To see why, let x :⊤ A⊣ b :C Bool and for a1, a2 :A, let
the terms b{a1/x} and b{a2/x} reduce to T rueand F alserespectively. Now,
(λ⊤x.if b then Nat else Unit) a1⊤≡C (λ⊤x.if b then Nat else Unit) a2⊤. But
then, by β-equivalence Nat≡C Unit.
17 typing.v:Typing Grade 18 geq.v:GEq refl,GEq symmetry,GEq trans
19 subst.v:CEq GEq equality substitution 20 geq.v:CEq GEq respects Step
20 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
To prove consistency, we construct a standard parallel reduction relation
and show that this relation is conﬂuent. Thereafter, we prove that if two terms
are deﬁnitionally equal at 𝓁, then they are joinable at 𝓁, meaning they reduce,
through parallel reduction, to two terms that are indistinguishable at 𝓁. Next,
we show that joinability at 𝓁 implies consistency. Therefore, we conclude that
for any 𝓁, the equality relation at 𝓁 is consistent. This implies that the equality
relation at C, that ignores sub-terms marked with ⊤, is sound. Hence, DDC
tracks compile-time irrelevance correctly. Note that DDC can track run-time
irrelevance the same way as DDC⊤.
We formally state consistency in terms of head forms , i.e. syntactic forms
that correspond to types such as sorts s, Unit, Πx :𝓁 A.B, etc.
Theorem 9 (Consistency 21). IfΦ⊣ a≡𝓁 b, and a and b both are head forms,
then they have the same head form.
5.7 Soundness theorem
DDC is type sound and we have checked this and other results using the Coq
proof assistant. Below, we give an overview of the important lemmas in this
development.
The properties below are stated for DDC, but they also apply to DDC⊤
since DDC degenerates to DDC⊤ whenever C =⊤. First, we list the proper-
ties related to grading that hold for all judgments: indexed indistinguishability,
deﬁnitional equality, and typing. (We only state the lemmas for typing, their
counterparts are analogous.) These lemmas are similar to their simply-typed
counterparts in Section 3.2.
Lemma 14 (Narrowing 22). If Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A and Ω′≤Ω, then Ω′⊣ a :𝓁 A
Lemma 15 (W eakening 23). If Ω1,Ω 2⊣ a :𝓁 A then Ω1,Ω,Ω 2⊣ a :𝓁 A.
Lemma 16 (Restricted upgrading 24). If Ω1, x :𝓁0 A,Ω 2⊣ b :𝓁 B and 𝓁1≤𝓁
then Ω1, x :𝓁0∨𝓁1 A,Ω 2⊣ b :𝓁 B.
Next, we list some properties that are speciﬁc to the typing judgment. For
any typing judgment in DDC, the observer grade 𝓁 is at most C. Further, the
observer grade of any judgment can be raised up to C.
Lemma 17 (Bounded by C 25). If Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A then 𝓁≤C.
Lemma 18 (Subsumption 26). If Ω ⊣ a :𝓁 A and 𝓁≤ k and k ≤ C then
Ω⊣ a :k A
21 consist.v:DefEq Consistent 22 narrowing.v:Typing narrowing
23 weakening.v:Typing weakening 24 pumping.v:Typing pumping
25 pumping.v:Typing leq C 26 typing.v:Typing subsumption
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 21
Note that we don’t require contexts to be well-formed in the typing judgment;
we add context well-formedness constraints, as required, to our lemmas. The
following lemmas are true for well-formed contexts. A context Ω is well-formed,
expressed as⊣Ω, iﬀ for any assumption x :𝓁 A inΩ, we haveΩ′ ⊩ A :⊤ s, where
Ω′ is the preﬁx of Ω that appears before the assumption.
Lemma 19 (Substitution 27). If Ω1, x :𝓁0 A,Ω 2⊣ b :𝓁 B and ⊣ Ω1 and Ω1 ⊩
a :𝓁0 A then Ω1,Ω 2{a/x}⊣ b{a/x} :𝓁 B{a/x}
Next, if a term is well-typed in our system, the type itself is also well-typed.
Lemma 20 (Regularity 28). If Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A and⊣Ω then Ω ⊩ A :⊤ s.
Finally, we have the two main lemmas proving type soundness.
Lemma 21 (Preservation 29). If Ω ⊣ a :𝓁 A and ⊣ Ω and a ; a′, then
Ω⊣ a′ :𝓁 A.
Lemma 22 (Progress 30). If ∅⊣ a :𝓁 A then either a is a value or there exists
some a′ such that a ; a′.
Hence, DDC is type sound. We have seen earlier that it tracks run-time and
compile-time irrelevance correctly.
DDC is parameterized by a generic pure type system and a generic lattice.
When the parameterizing pure type system is strongly normalizing, such as the
Calculus of Constructions, type-checking is decidable. In the next section, we
provide a demonstration.
6 Type Checking
As a pure type system, not all instances of DDC admit decidable type checking.
For example, in the presence of the type:type axiom, the system includes non-
terminating computations via Girard’s paradox. As as a result, we cannot decide
equality in that system, so type checking will be undecidable. However, if the
sorts, axioms and rules are chosen such that the language is strongly normaliz-
ing, then we can deﬁne a decidable type checking algorithm. This algorithm is
standard, but relies on a decision procedure for the equality judgement.
Our consistency proof, described in Section 5.6, gives us a start. This proof
uses an auxiliary binary relation called joinability, which holds when two terms
can use multiple steps of parallel reduction to reach two simpler terms that
diﬀer only in their unobservable components. Joinability and deﬁnitional equality
induce the same relation on DDC terms. We can show that two DDC terms
are deﬁnitionally equal if and only if they are joinable 31, which means that a
27 typing.v:Typing substitution CTyping 28 typing.v:Typing regularity
29 typing.v:Typing preservation 30 progress.v:Typing progress
31 consist.v:DefEq Joins,Joins DefEq
22 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
decision procedure based on joinability will be sound and complete for DDC’s
labeled deﬁnition of equivalence.
Therefore, the decidability of type checking reduces to showing strong nor-
malization. If we select the sorts, axioms and rules of DDC to match those of the
Calculus of Constructions (Barendregt, 1993), we believe that this result holds,
but leave a direct proof for future work. However, by translating this instance of
DDC to ICC∗, we can show that a sublanguage of this instance is strongly nor-
malizing. ICC∗ (Barras and Bernardo, 2008), is a version of the Implicit Calculus
of Constructions with annotations that support decidable type checking, but be-
cause it includes only (relevant and irrelevant) Π-types, so we must restrict our
attention to the corresponding fragment of DDC.
We deﬁne the following translation, written ~·, that converts DDC terms to
ICC∗ terms. The key parts of this translation map arguments labeled C and
below to relevant arguments, and those labeled greater than C, such as ⊤, to
irrelevant arguments.32
~x = x ~s = s ~Πx :𝓁 A.B =
{
Π(x : ~A). ~B if𝓁≤C
Π[x : ~A]. ~B otherwise
~λx :𝓁 A.b =
{
λ(x : ~A).~b if𝓁≤C
λ[x : ~A].~b otherwise
~b a𝓁 =
{~b (~a) if 𝓁≤C
~b [~a] otherwise
Note that ICC∗ compares terms for equality after an erasure operation, writ-
ten·∗, that removes all irrelevant arguments. Now, we can show that the above
translation preserves deﬁnitional equality and typing. Here, ~Ω denotes Ω with
the labels at the variable bindings omitted.
Lemma 23 (T ranslation preservation). If Φ⊣ A≡C B, then ~A∗∼=βη ~B∗.
If Ω⊣ a :𝓁 A, then ~Ω⊣ ~a : ~A.
Next, observe that because β-reductions are preserved by the translation, any
parallel reduction in DDC between terms a and b at levelC, where a⁄= b, would
correspond to a sequence of reduction steps ~a→+
βie
~b in ICC∗. That means that
an inﬁnite sequence of parallel reductions a0, a1, . . . , where each term diﬀers
from the previous, corresponds to an inﬁnite sequence of reductions ~a0, ~a1 . . . in
ICC∗. Therefore, as all well-typed ICC∗ terms are strongly normalizing, we can
conclude that this is so for this instance of DDC.
Non-terminating instances of DDC. For pure type systems that are not strongly
normalizing, such as the type:type language, there is an alternative approach
to developing a calculus with decidable type checking, following Weirich et al.
(2017). The key idea is to develop an annotated version of DDC that book-keeps
32 The syntax of ICC ∗ uses parentheses to indicate usual (relevant) arguments and
square brackets to indicate arguments that are irrelevant at both run time and
compile time.
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 23
additional information from typing and equality derivations. In such an anno-
tated version, the conversion rule would include an explicit coercion annotation
that witnesses the equality between the concerned types, thus avoiding the need
for normalization.
7 Discussions and Related Work
7.1 Irrelevance in Dependent Type Theories
Overall, compile-time and run-time irrelevance is a well-studied topic in the
design of dependent type systems. In some systems, the focus is only on support
for run-time irrelevance: see McBride (2016); Atkey (2018); Brady (2021); Miquel
(2001); Mishra-Linger and Sheard (2008); Tejiˇ sˇ c´ ak (2020). In other systems,
the focus is on compile-time irrelevance: see Pfenning (2001); Abel and Scherer
(2012). Some systems support both, but require them to overlap, such as Barras
and Bernardo (2008); Mishra-Linger (2008); Weirich et al. (2017); Nuyts and
Devriese (2018). The system of Moon et al. (2021) does not require them to
overlap but their type system does not make use of compile-time irrelevance in
the conversion rule.
To compare, systemDDC⊤, presented here, can support run-time irrelevance
only and is similar to the core language of Tejiˇ sˇ c´ ak (2020). However, note that
DDC⊤ can track dependencies in general while the system in Tejiˇ sˇ c´ ak (2020)
tracks run-time irrelevance alone. DDC, on the other hand, is the only system
that we are aware of that tracks run-time and compile-time irrelevance separately
and makes use of the latter in the conversion rule. Further, DDC tracks these
irrelevances in the presence of strong Σ-types with erasable ﬁrst components,
something which, to the best of our knowledge, no prior work has been able to.
Prior work has identiﬁed the diﬃculty in handling strong Σ-types with
erasable ﬁrst components in a setting that tracks compile-time irrelevance. Abel
and Scherer (2012) point out that strong irrelevant Σ-types make their theory
inconsistent. Similarly, EPTS• (Mishra-Linger, 2008) cannot deﬁne the projec-
tions for pairs having such Σ-types. The reason behind this is that EPTS • is
hard-wired to work with a two-element lattice which identiﬁes compile-time and
run-time irrelevance. As such, projections from such pairs lead to type unsound-
ness. For example, considering the ﬁrst components to be run-time irrelevant,
the pairs ( Int, unit) and ( Bool, unit) are run-time equivalent. Since EPTS •
identiﬁes run-time and compile-time irrelevance, these pairs are also compile-
time equivalent. Then, taking the ﬁrst projections of these pairs, one ends up
with Int and Bool being compile-time equivalent. We resolve this problem by
distinguishing between run-time and compile-time irrelevance, thus requiring a
lattice with three elements.
Next, we compare our work with existing literature with respect to the equal-
ity relation. We analyze compile-time irrelevance to enable the equality relation
to ignore unnecessary sub-terms. However, since our equality relation is untyped,
we cannot include type-dependent rules in our system, such as η-equivalence for
24 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
the Unit type. Several prior works on irrelevance (Miquel, 2001; Barras and
Bernardo, 2008; Mishra-Linger, 2008; Tejiˇ sˇ c´ ak, 2020) use an untyped equality
relation. However, some prior work, such as Pfenning (2001); Abel and Scherer
(2012), do consider compile-time irrelevance in the context of typed-directed
equality. But such systems require irrelevant arguments to functions appear only
irrelevantly in the codomain type of the function, thus ruling out several exam-
ples including the polymorphic identity function.
7.2 Quantitative Type Systems
Our work is closely related to quantitative type systems (Petricek et al., 2014;
Ghica and Smith, 2014; Brunel et al., 2014; McBride, 2016; Atkey, 2018; Orchard
et al., 2019; Abel and Bernardy, 2020; Choudhury et al., 2021; Moon et al., 2021).
Such systems provide a ﬁne-grained accounting of coeﬀects, viewed as resources,
for example, variable usage, linearity, liveness, etc. A typical judgment from a
quantitative type system (Choudhury et al., 2021) may look like:
x :1 Bool, y :1 Int, z :0 Bool⊣ ifx theny + 1 elsey− 1 : 1 Int
The variable x is used once in the condition, the variable y is used once in each
of the branches while the variable z is not used at all. As such, they are marked
with these quantities in the context.
This form of judgment is very similar to our typing judgments with quantities
appearing in place of levels. However, there is a crucial diﬀerence: to the right of
the turnstile, while any level may appear in our judgments, only the quantity 1
can appear in typing judgments of quantitative systems. A quantitative system
that allows an arbitrary quantity to the right of the turnstile is not closed under
substitution (McBride, 2016; Atkey, 2018). As such, quantitative systems are tied
to a ﬁxed reference while our systems can view programs from diﬀerent reference
levels. This diﬀerence in form results from the diﬀerence in the purposes the two
kinds of systems serve: quantitative systems count while our systems compare.
Counting requires a ﬁxed standard or reference whereas comparison does not.
Applications that require counting, like linearity tracking, are handled well by
quantitative systems while applications that require comparison, like ensuring
secure information ﬂow, are handled well by systems of our kind.
From a type-theoretic standpoint, in general, quantitative systems cannot
eliminate pairs through projections. This is so because there is no general way
to split the resources of the context that type-checks a pair. Eliminating pairs
through projections is straightforward in our systems because the grade on the
typing judgment can control where the projections are visible.
7.3 Dependency Analysis and Dependent Type Theory
Dependency analysis and dependent type theories have come together in some
existing work.
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 25
Like our system, Prost (2000) extends theλ-cube so that it may track depen-
dencies. However, unlike our system, this work uses sorts to track dependencies.
It is inspired by the distinction between sorts in the Calculus of Constructions
where computationally relevant and irrelevant terms live in sorts Set and Prop
respectively. As Mishra-Linger (2008) points out, such an approach ties up two
distinct language features, sorts and dependency analysis, which can be treated
in a more orthogonal manner.
Bernardy and Guilhem (2013) is very related to our work. They use colors
to erase terms while we use grades. Colors and grades both form a lattice struc-
ture and their usage in the respective type systems are quite similar. However,
Bernardy and Guilhem (2013) use internalized parametricity to reason about
erasure; so it is important that their type theory is logically consistent. Our
work does not rely on the normalizing nature of the theory; we take a direct
route to analyzing erasure.
Like our work, Louren¸ co and Caires (2015) track information ﬂow in a de-
pendent type system. But Louren¸ co and Caires (2015) focus on more imperative
features, like modeling of state while we focus on irrelevance. A distinguishing
feature of their system is that they allow security labels to depend upon terms,
something that we don’t attempt here.
8 Conclusion
We started with the aim of designing a dependent calculus that can analyze
dependencies in general, and run-time and compile-time irrelevance in partic-
ular. Towards this end, we designed a simple dependency calculus, SDC, and
then extended it to two dependent calculi, DDC⊤ and DDC. DDC⊤ can track
run-time irrelevance while DDC can track both run-time and compile-time irrel-
evance along with other dependencies.
In future, we would like to explore how irrelevance interacts with other de-
pendencies. We also want to explore whether our systems can be integrated with
existing graded type systems, especially quantitative type systems. Yet another
interesting direction for research is that how they compare with graded eﬀect
systems.
Our work lies in the intersection of dependency analysis and irrelevance track-
ing in dependent type systems. Both these areas have rich literature of their
own. We hope that the connections established in this paper will be mutually
beneﬁcial and help in the future exploration of dependencies and irrelevance in
dependent type systems.
9 Acknowledgments
The ﬁrst two authors were supported by the National Science Foundation under
Grant Nos. 1703835 and 1521539. The second author was supported by the
National Science Foundation under Grant No. 2104535.
Bibliography
Abadi, M., Banerjee, A., Heintze, N., Riecke, J.G.: A core calculus of depen-
dency. In: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on
Principles of Programming Languages, p. 147–160, POPL ’99, Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (1999), ISBN 1581130953,
https://doi.org/10.1145/292540.292555
Abel, A., Bernardy, J.P.: A uniﬁed view of modalities in type systems. Proc.
ACM Program. Lang. 4(ICFP) (Aug 2020), https://doi.org/10.1145/3408972
Abel, A., Scherer, G.: On irrelevance and algorithmic equality in predica-
tive type theory. Logical Methods in Computer Science 8(1) (mar 2012),
https://doi.org/10.2168/lmcs-8(1:29)2012
Atkey, R.: Syntax and semantics of quantitative type theory. In: Proceedings of
the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science, p.
56–65, LICS ’18, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA
(2018), ISBN 9781450355834, https://doi.org/10.1145/3209108.3209189
Barendregt, H.P.: Lambda Calculi with Types, p. 117–309. Oxford University
Press, Inc., USA (1993), ISBN 0198537611
Barras, B., Bernardo, B.: The implicit calculus of constructions as a program-
ming language with dependent types. In: Amadio, R. (ed.) Foundations of
Software Science and Computational Structures, pp. 365–379, FOSSACS 2008,
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Budapest, Hungary (2008)
Bernardy, J.P., Guilhem, M.: Type-theory in color. SIGPLAN Not. 48(9), 61–72
(Sep 2013), ISSN 0362-1340, https://doi.org/10.1145/2544174.2500577
Brady, E.: Idris 2: Quantitative Type Theory in Practice. In: Møller, A.,
Sridharan, M. (eds.) 35th European Conference on Object-Oriented Pro-
gramming (ECOOP 2021), Leibniz International Proceedings in Informatics
(LIPIcs), vol. 194, pp. 9:1–9:26, Schloss Dagstuhl – Leibniz-Zentrum f¨ ur Infor-
matik, Dagstuhl, Germany (2021), ISBN 978-3-95977-190-0, ISSN 1868-8969,
https://doi.org/10.4230/LIPIcs.ECOOP.2021.9
Brunel, A., Gaboardi, M., Mazza, D., Zdancewic, S.: A core quantitative coeﬀect
calculus. In: Shao, Z. (ed.) Programming Languages and Systems, pp. 351–370,
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2014)
Choudhury, P., Eades III, H., Eisenberg, R.A., Weirich, S.: A graded depen-
dent type system with a usage-aware semantics. Proc. ACM Program. Lang.
5(POPL) (Jan 2021), https://doi.org/10.1145/3434331
Choudhury, P., Eades III, H., Weirich, S.: Artifact associated with ”A Dependent
Dependency Calculus” (Jan 2022a), https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.5903726
Choudhury, P., Eades III, H., Weirich, S.: A dependent dependency calculus
(extended version) (2022b), URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11040
Denning, D.E.: A lattice model of secure information ﬂow. Commun. ACM19(5),
236–243 (May 1976), ISSN 0001-0782, https://doi.org/10.1145/360051.360056
Eisenberg, R.A., Duboc, G., Weirich, S., Lee, D.: An existential crisis resolved:
Type inference for ﬁrst-class existential types. Proc. ACM Program. Lang.
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 27
5(ICFP) (Aug 2021), URL https://richarde.dev/papers/2021/exists/
exists.pdf
Ghica, D.R., Smith, A.I.: Bounded linear types in a resource semiring. In: Eu-
ropean Symposium on Programming Languages and Systems, pp. 331–350,
Springer (2014)
Heintze, N., Riecke, J.G.: The slam calculus: Programming with secrecy and
integrity. In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium
on Principles of Programming Languages, p. 365–377, POPL ’98, Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (1998), ISBN 0897919793,
https://doi.org/10.1145/268946.268976
Louren¸ co, L., Caires, L.: Dependent information ﬂow types. In: Proceed-
ings of the 42nd Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Prin-
ciples of Programming Languages, p. 317–328, POPL ’15, Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2015), ISBN 9781450333009,
https://doi.org/10.1145/2676726.2676994
McBride, C.: I Got Plenty o’ Nuttin’, pp. 207–233. Springer International Pub-
lishing, Cham (2016)
Miquel, A.: The implicit calculus of constructions extending pure type systems
with an intersection type binder and subtyping. In: Abramsky, S. (ed.) Typed
Lambda Calculi and Applications, pp. 344–359, Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
Berlin, Heidelberg (2001), ISBN 978-3-540-45413-7
Mishra-Linger, N., Sheard, T.: Erasure and polymorphism in pure type systems.
In: Proceedings of the Theory and Practice of Software, 11th International
Conference on Foundations of Software Science and Computational Struc-
tures, p. 350–364, FOSSACS’08/ETAPS’08, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidel-
berg (2008), ISBN 3540784977
Mishra-Linger, R.N.: Irrelevance, Polymorphism, and Erasure in Type Theory.
Ph.D. thesis, Portland State University, Department of Computer Science
(2008), https://doi.org/10.15760/etd.2669
Moggi, E.: Notions of computation and monads. Information and Computation
93(1), 55–92 (1991), ISSN 0890-5401, URL https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/0890540191900524, selections from 1989 IEEE
Symposium on Logic in Computer Science
Moon, B., Eades III, H., Orchard, D.: Graded modal dependent type theory. In:
Yoshida, N. (ed.) Programming Languages and Systems, pp. 462–490, Springer
International Publishing, Cham (2021), ISBN 978-3-030-72019-3
Nuyts, A., Devriese, D.: Degrees of relatedness: A uniﬁed framework for para-
metricity, irrelevance, ad hoc polymorphism, intersections, unions and al-
gebra in dependent type theory. In: Dawar, A., Gr¨ adel, E. (eds.) Proceed-
ings of the 33rd Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Sci-
ence, LICS 2018, Oxford, UK, July 09-12, 2018, pp. 779–788, ACM (2018),
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209108.3209119, URL https://doi.org/10.1145/
3209108
Orchard, D., Liepelt, V.B., Eades III, H.: Quantitative program reasoning
with graded modal types. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 3(ICFP) (Jul 2019),
https://doi.org/10.1145/3341714
28 Pritam Choudhury, Harley Eades III, and Stephanie Weirich
Petricek, T., Orchard, D., Mycroft, A.: Coeﬀects: A calculus of context-
dependent computation. In: Proceedings of International Conference on Func-
tional Programming, ICFP 2014 (2014)
Pfenning, F.: Intensionality, extensionality, and proof irrelevance in modal type
theory. In: Proceedings of the 16th Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in Com-
puter Science, pp. 221–, LICS ’01, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC,
USA (2001), URL http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=871816.871845
Prost, F.: A static calculus of dependencies for the λ-cube. In:
Proceedings Fifteenth Annual IEEE Symposium on Logic in
Computer Science (Cat. No.99CB36332), pp. 267–276 (2000),
https://doi.org/10.1109/LICS.2000.855775
Shikuma, N., Igarashi, A.: Proving noninterference by a fully complete transla-
tion to the simply typed λ-calculus. In: Proceedings of the 11th Asian Com-
puting Science Conference on Advances in Computer Science: Secure Software
and Related Issues, p. 301–315, ASIAN’06, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg
(2006), ISBN 3540775048
Smith, G., Volpano, D.: Secure information ﬂow in a multi-threaded imperative
language. In: Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium
on Principles of Programming Languages, p. 355–364, POPL ’98, Association
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (1998), ISBN 0897919793,
https://doi.org/10.1145/268946.268975
Sulzmann, M., Chakravarty, M.M.T., Jones, S.P., Donnelly, K.: System f with
type equality coercions. In: Proceedings of the 2007 ACM SIGPLAN Inter-
national Workshop on Types in Languages Design and Implementation, p.
53–66, TLDI ’07, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA
(2007), ISBN 159593393X, https://doi.org/10.1145/1190315.1190324
Tejiˇ sˇ c´ ak, M.: A dependently typed calculus with pattern matching and
erasure inference. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 4(ICFP) (Aug 2020),
https://doi.org/10.1145/3408973
Thiemann, P.: A uniﬁed framework for binding-time analysis. In: Proceedings of
the 7th International Joint Conference CAAP/FASE on Theory and Practice
of Software Development, p. 742–756, TAPSOFT ’97, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg (1997), ISBN 3540627812
Tip, F.: A survey of program slicing techniques. Journal of Programming Lan-
guages 3 (1995)
Weirich, S., Voizard, A., de Amorim, P.H.A., Eisenberg, R.A.: A speciﬁcation for
dependent types in Haskell. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 1(ICFP), 31:1–31:29
(Aug 2017), ISSN 2475-1421, https://doi.org/10.1145/3110275
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any
medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes
were made.
A Dependent Dependency Calculus 29
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s
Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If
material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need
to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
