Generic Attack on Duplex-Based AEAD Modes
using Random Function Statistics
Henri Gilbert1,2, Rachelle Heim Boissier2, Louiza Khati1, Yann Rotella2
1ANSSI, France
2Université Paris-Saclay, UVSQ, CNRS, Laboratoire de mathématiques de Versailles,
78000, Versailles, France
Abstract. Duplex-based authenticated encryption modes with a suffi-
ciently large key length are proven to be secure up to the birthday bound
2
c
2 , wherec is the capacity. However this bound is not known to be tight
and the complexity of the best known generic attack, which is based on
multicollisions, is much larger: it reaches2c
α where α represents a small
security loss factor. There is thus an uncertainty on the true extent of
security beyond the bound2
c
2 provided by such constructions. In this
paper, we describe a new generic attack against several duplex-based
AEAD modes. Our attack leverages random functions statistics and pro-
duces a forgery in time complexityO(2
3c
4 ) using negligible memory and
no encryption queries. Furthermore, for some duplex-based modes, our
attack recovers the secret key with a negligible amount of additional com-
putations. Most notably, our attack breaks a security claim made by the
designers of the NIST lightweight competition candidateXoodyak. This
attack is a step further towards determining the exact security provided
by duplex-based constructions.
Keywords: Cryptanalysis · Symmetric cryptography· AEAD · Duplex-
based constructions · NIST lightweight competition· Xoodyak · Ran-
dom functions
1 Introduction
Authenticated Encryption (AE), which allows to encrypt and authenticate a
plaintext message in a combined way, is one of the main workhorses of symmet-
ric cryptography. AE often offers the option to authenticate, in addition to the
plaintext message, some extra data which, unlike the plaintext, are transmit-
ted unencrypted. AE is then renamed Authenticated Encryption with Associ-
ated Data (AEAD). A considerable research effort was devoted during the last
years to the design and analysis of efficient and secure AEAD algorithms. Ex-
amples of AEAD mechanisms largely deployed over the Internet are AES-GCM
and Chacha20-Poly1305. In 2014-2019, the three-round process of the CAESAR
competition for authenticated encryption resulted in the selection of a portfolio
of six AEAD mechanisms chosen to address the needs of the three following
use cases: lightweight applications, high-performance applications and provision
of defense-in-depth features, e.g. nonce misuse resistance. Another symmetric
algorithms selection initiative, the ongoing NIST lightweight cryptography stan-
dardization process, aims at selecting (families of) algorithms suitable for use in
constrained environment that comprise at least an AEAD mechanism and op-
tionally a cryptographic hashing mechanism. The process was launched in 2018
and has now reached its third round, where ten finalists are still being evaluated.
Most existing AEAD algorithms are eitherblock cipher-basedorpermutation-
based. In the first case, they result from the application of a suitable mode of
operation to a block cipher or a tweakable block cipher. In the second case,
they consist in the instantiation of a keyed mode of operation with a public
permutation. In this paper, we focus on so-called duplex-based keyed modes.
Seminal examples of such modes are SpongeWrap and MonkeyDuplex, both
introduced by Bertoni, Daemen, Peeters and Van Assche [7,10]. Duplex-based
modes can be viewed as an adaptation to the AEAD context of theSponge
construction for hash functions introduced by the same authors in [8,6]. After
an initialization phase allowing to derive ab-bit state from a key and an IV
value, they essentially iterate calls to a key-less public permutationP of the
state space {0, 1}b in alternance with an injection and/or extraction of data
blocks on/from a dedicatedr-bit part (r < b) of the current state value in order
to absorb additional data, encrypt and absorb the plaintext, and produce an
authentication tag.1 The sizes r and c = b − r bits of the state parts affected
(resp. unaffected) by data injections or extractions are named therate and the
capacity. The corresponding state parts are referred to as theouter and theinner
state.
The security of duplex-based constructionshas been extensively studied
during the last decade. Let us denote the total time complexity of an attack by
T = σe +σd +qP +textra−op, whereσe and σd respectively represent the number
of online calls toP caused by the adversary’s encryption requests and forgery
attempts andqP represents the number of offline queries toP or its inverse. The
last term textra−op represents the extra computations not taken into account
in σe + σd + qP , e.g. computations of primitives involved in the initialization
and finalization, basic read/write operations in memory, random samplings. It
is measured as an equivalent number ofP computations.2 Let us further denote
by qd the number of forgery attempts of the adversary. The initial security ar-
guments for duplex constructions, which leveraged the indifferentiability of the
sponge construction for hash functions, only allowed to guarantee the security
of the duplex constructions as long asT ≪min{2
c
2 , 2κ} and qd ≪ 2τ , whereκ
and τ represent the key length and the tag length. In [27,28], Jovanovicet al.
1The name “duplex”, that conveys the idea of a bidirectional process, reflects the
fact that in such constructions both a data block injection and a data block extraction
to/from the current state can potentially take place between two consecutive invoca-
tions ofP.
2Note that in the attack considered in the sequel, textra−op will in practice be
negligible compared toσe + σd + qP .
2
showed that in the nonce-respecting setting, the security of a series of duplex
constructions can be ensured beyond the birthday bound2
c
2 , namely as long as
T ≪min{2
b
2 , 2c
α , 2κ} and qd ≪ 2τ , (1)
where α represents a small constant upper bounded byr in [27] and a tighter,
substantially smaller constant in [28]. The detail of the security proofs sections
of [27,28] indicates however that the bounds (1) are only valid under the as-
sumption thatσd is strongly limited: if one wants to avoid implicit assumptions
about σd, the bounding conditions (1) must be replaced by the more complete
(though still simplified) conditions:
T ≪min{2
b
2 , 2c
α , 2c
σd
, 2κ} and qd ≪ 2τ . (2)
Unlike the conditions (1), the complete bounding conditions (2) can hardly
be considered as ‘beyond-birthday bounds’. Forσd ≥ 2
c
2 , the conditionT ≪2c
σd
of (2) indeed impliesT ≪2
c
2 . Thus, the security of the considered duplex-based
constructions without assumptions onσd can only be guaranteed as long as the
birthday conditionT ≪2
c
2 is met.
The bounding conditions (1) were used for dimensioning the family of duplex
AEADs NORX, and led since 2014 to several other AEAD design proposals based
on duplex-like constructions with a claimed security level strictly larger than
c
2 . Similar bounds were shown to still hold when instead of limiting the size of
injected and extracted data blocks tor bits, one only limits the size of extracted
data blocks tor bits but full-state data injections are permitted [30]. This leads
to AEAD proposals where the efficiency of the associated data absorption phase
is increased.A generalisationof the full-statekeyedduplex of[30] with multi-user
support, accompanied by a refined security analysis, was published in [20].
Genericattacksonduplex-basedconstructions. Thebestcurrentlyknown
genericattacksonduplex-basedconstructionsarebasedonmulticollisions.These
attacks match the security bound2c
α where α represents a small security loss
factor as stated before. They are presented in detail in [28] and can be roughly
outlined as follows. First, the adversary submits sufficiently many calls to an
encryption oracle in order to find a multicollision among the outer state values
of a numberρ of states. Once this has been achieved, an exhaustive search for
a c-bit value matching the inner state value of one of theseρ states is likely to
succeed after about2c
ρ trials.
Our contribution.The end of the former discussion on the security of duplex-
based constructions showed that in situations where the possibility of forgery
attempts of non-negligible data complexityσd is not precluded, the complete
bounding conditions (2) only prevent the existence of generic attacks of total
complexity T ≪ 2
c
2 . It is therefore an open question whether there exists a
3
generic attack of total complexityT strictly comprised between2
c
2 and the com-
plexity 2c
α of multicollision-based attacks.3 In this paper, we provide a positive
answer to the former open question by exhibiting a generic attack against a large
family of duplex-based constructions of total time complexityT in O(2
3c
4 ). We
rely on the analysis of random function statistics to design a two-phase forgery
attack with a precomputation phase of time complexityO(2
3c
4 ) essentially equal
to qP and an actual forgery phase of time complexityO(2
3c
4 ) essentially equal
to σd. The valueσd can also be viewed as the data complexity of the attack
measured in ciphertext blocks. The attack requires no encryption queries,i.e.
σe = 0, and textra−op is negligible compared toqP and σd. For some of these
constructions, our attack recovers the secret key.
Our attack takes advantage of the following property shared by several au-
thenticated encryption modes based on the duplex construction: for a ciphertext
built by concatenating a fixed block multiple times, the decryption of a message
consists in the iteration of a public function with domain and co-domainFc
2.
This public function is fully determined by the value of the ciphertext block. We
are therefore able to precompute some of its parameters offline. Forgery strate-
gies that just assume a “near to average” behaviour of the iterated function, e.g
a cycle length of the path generated by a random point of{0, 1}c close to the
expected value
p
π2c/8, do not seem to lead to forgery attack complexities bet-
ter thanO(2c). We show that however, the following two-phase attack strategy
allows an adversary to produce an existential forgery with a success probability
close to 1 and a total (online and offline) computation timeT = O(2
3c
4 ).
1) In an offline phase, a significant amountO(2
3c
4 ) of precomputation is ded-
icated to the detection of ac-bit to c-bit function that possesses exceptional
characteristics that exponentially deviate from an average behaviour, thus ren-
dering its use in a forgery attack more efficient.
2) In an online phase, the iteration of the function identified in the offline phase
is used to produce forgery attempts whose success probability is exceptionally
high.
In slightly more detail, the offline phase aims at selecting a ciphertext block
that determines a function whose graph possesses a large component in which all
paths are terminated by the same exceptionally small cycle, of length at most a
small predefined multiple of2
c
4 . This is shown to imply that for long ciphertexts
obtained by repeating the selected ciphertext block, the tag is the image of one
of the values of the former small cycle by a known function with a probability
close to 1. This in turn allows to mount a forgery attack of offline, online and
total time complexityO(2
3c
4 ).
The precomputation phase needs to be run only once to break the same
construction with as many different keys as desired. Further, we can adjust the
trade-off between the precomputation phase and the online phase in order to
3In other words, the questions whether the “birthday term”2c
σd
is an artifact of the
proofs and whether the capacity valuec can be safely dimensioned well below2s, where
s denotes the targeted security level remain open.
4
bring the complexity of the latter closer toO(2
c
2 ) at the expense of significantly
increasing the complexity of the former.
Previously published generic attacks against hash-based MACs or hash func-
tionsalsorelyonthestatisticsofrandomfunctions[32,29,33,4].Suchattacksalso
model, as the AEAD attack introduced here, one function that the considered
construction allows to iterate as a random function. Yet, while previous attacks
generally assume and exploit a “near to average” behaviour of a function selected
at random, an essential feature of the attack presented here is that it selects and
leverages instances of a function whose behaviour exceptionally deviates from
average.
Our attack is applicable to several duplex-based modes such as monkeyWrap,
monkeyDuplex or Motorist. Most notably, our attack is applicable to Cyclist, the
mode of the Lightweight Cryptography NIST competition finalistXoodyak[18].
With a key recovery attack of complexity2148 applications of the state update
functionXoodoo, we break the claim of achieving184-bit security against plain-
text recovery and forgery attacks made by the designers in [18, Corollary 2, p.
72]. Note that this does not threaten the112-bit security level required by the
NIST. Our results are detailed in Section 5 and displayed in Table 5.
Organization. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 intro-
duces definitions and results related to the statistics of random functions that
are relevant for our attack and defines a ‘vanilla’ duplex-based AEAD mode that
only captures those features of duplex-based constructions that are essential to
understand our attack. Section 3 presents our attack and analyses its perfor-
mance using the vanilla mode of Section 2 as the target in order to simplify
its presentation. Section 4 presents experimental validations of essential features
of the attack based on small scale implementations. Section 5 shows that the
attack of Section 3 is applicable to several real-life duplex modes with minor
adaptations. Section 5 also discusses variations encountered in AEADs such as
Beetle [16] or Ascon [22] that, on the other hand, prevent the attack.
2 Preliminaries
In this section, we start by introducing key definitions and results related to
the statistics of random functions. Next, we describe a simplified duplex-based
authenticated encryption mode on which we will rely to describe our attack.
This is followed by a short subsection on the security model on which we rely.
2.1 Preliminaries on random functions
Let Fn be the set of all functions which map a finite set of sizen ∈ N∗ to itself.
Without loss of generality, we consider the set{1, . . . , n}. Each functionf in Fn
determines a directed graphG(f) in which a vertex goes from nodei to nodej,
i, j∈ {1, . . . , n}, if and only iff(i) = j [31,24]. In the following, for simplicity
reasons, we say that a node belongs to the graph of a function when it belongs
5
to the set of nodes of this graph. We use the term “random function inFn” to
refer to a function selected uniformly at random in the setFn.
For anyf in Fn and any nodex in G(f), we can iteratef and consider the
set ofsuccessors of x
S(x) ={fi(x) | 0 ≤ i ≤ n − 1}.
We denote by s(x) the size of this set. Since the graph has a finite number
of nodes, the sequence {fi(x)}i≥0 is eventually periodic. Graphically, it thus
corresponds to a path linked to acycle defined as
C(x) ={fi(x) | ∃j >0, fi(x) =fi+j(x)}.
We denote by µ(x) = #C(x) the length of this cycle orcycle length and by
λ(x) =s(x) − #C(x) the length of this path ortail length. The tail lengthλ(x)
is the smallest integeri such thatfi(x) ∈ C(x). The set of all nodesy ∈ G(f)
such that C(y) = C(x) forms a connected component. Since all nodes in the
same connected component have the same cycle, thecycle of a componentis
well-defined.
Our cryptanalysis relies on the attacker’s ability to find functions which have
a large component with a small cycle. We formally characterize what should be
understood by “large component with a small cycle” later on. To do so, we will
need the two following definitions.
Definition 1 (ν-component). Let 0 < ν <1
2 . Aν-component is a component
that has a cycle of size at mostn
1
2 −ν.
Definition 2 ((s, ν)-component). Let 0 < ν < 1
2 , 0 < s < 1. A (s, ν)-
component is aν-component whose size is greater or equal tons.
In order to estimate the complexity and success probability of our attack, we
rely on the statistical analysis of random functions. Such an analysis has been
extensively conducted in combinatorics [25,31,21,23,24]. In this paper, we will
need the three following results.
Expectancy of cycle length and tail length for a random point [23].For
a random nodex in the graph of a random functionf ∈ Fn, Flajolet and Odlyzko
have computed the asymptotic form of the expectancy of the cycle lengthµ(x)
and tail lengthλ(x) using generating functions. They obtained an expectancy
of pπn
8 for both.
Probability for a random point to belong to aν-component [25]. For
a random nodex belonging to the graph of a random functionf ∈ Fn, Harris
shows that the probability thatµ(x) is smaller thann
1
2 −ν is asymptotically
pν = 1− e− 1
2n2ν +
√
2π
nν

1 − ϕ(n−ν)

=
√
2π
2nν + O
 1
n2ν

6
where ϕ(y) =
Ry
−∞(2π)−1
2 e−1
2 x2
dx. This corresponds to the probability for a
random nodex of the graph of a random function to belong to aν-component.
For example, forν = 1
4 andc a positive integer such thatn = 2c,pν =
√
2π
2 ×2−c
4 .
Probability for a random function to have a(s, ν)-component [21].
For a randomf ∈ Fn, the probabilityps,ν that G(f) has a(s, ν)-component has
been estimated by DeLaurentis in a paper published at Crypto 1987 [21]. It is
shown to be
ps,ν =
r
2(1 − s)
πs n−ν [1 +O (rn(s))]
where rn(s) = s−2n−1
2 −3ν + s
−1
2 n−ν + n−1
3 . Thus, ps,ν ≈
q
2(1−s)
πs n−ν. For
example, if we takeν = 1
4 , s = 0.65 as in Section 3.6, andc a positive integer
such thatn = 2c, ps,ν ≃ 0.6 × 2−c
4 .
Probability for a random point to belong to its component’s cycle
after l −1 applications off. Let x be a random point of a random function.
Harris [25] gives the asymptotic density function of the number of successors
s(x). More precisely, he provides the asymptotic density functionf1 of s√n for
x >0
f1(x) =xe−x2
2 .
Forl a positive integer, letpl be the probability thatfl−1(x) is in the cycle, that
is, the probability thatλ(x) ≤ l − 1. Since the number of successors is greater
than the tail length,pl is greater or equal to the probability forx to have strictly
less thanl successors. Thus, we have
pl ≥ 1 − e− l2
2n .
Notationalconventions. Forsimplicityandreadabilityreasons,whenitcomes
to estimates resulting from statistics on random functions, we will use the sign
“≤” where it would be more rigorous to use the smaller or equivalent sign “⪅”
in the rest of the paper.
2.2 Description of a vanilla duplex-based AEAD mode
The duplex construction was designed by theKeccak team as a tool to build
authenticated encryption modes [7,9]. The first proposal of such a mode is
SpongeWrap [7], published in 2011. Today, many modes are based on this
construction. In this paper, we define the simplified authenticated encryption
mode DuplexAEAD. DuplexAEAD shares its structure with the modes of
several duplex-based AEAD schemes. This mode is not meant to be used in
7
practice. It is defined for readability reasons: its sole purpose is to make the
description of our attack simpler. We show in Section 5 how our attack can be
adapted to several real-life duplex-based modes.
DuplexAEAD is instantiated with a permutationP which operates on a
b-bit stateS divided into two parts. The firstr bits of the state form theouter
state S, whilst the nextc = b−r bits form theinner state bS. The state can thus
be written as S = S||bS. As stated in Section 1, the parameterr is called the
rate and the parameterc is called thecapacity. DuplexAEAD also involves two
other public functions, namely, an initialisation functionPinit and a finalisation
function Pfinal . The encryption algorithmE takes as input aκ-bit keyK, aη-bit
nonce N, a plaintextM and associated dataA of variable length and returns
a ciphertext C and a τ-bit tag T. The decryption algorithmD takes as input
(K, N, A, C, T) and returns the plaintext M if the tag is valid. Otherwise, it
returns ⊥.
We assume for simplicity reasons that the length in bits of the plaintexts
processed by DuplexAEAD is always divisible byr.4 Thus, any plaintextM
can be split intor-bit blocks,M = M0||···|| Ml−1, wherel is the plaintext length
in number of r-bit blocks. The ciphertext’s length is equal to the plaintext’s
length, and can thus also be writtenC = C0||···|| Cl−1.
The mode works as follows (see Figure 1):
initial phase
(K, N)
A
Pinit
r
c
plaintext processing
P
M0 C0
P
M1 C1
. . .
. . .
final phase
Pfinal
Ml−1 Cl−1 T
Fig. 1.DuplexAEAD in encryption mode.
4In practice, our cryptanalysis can be easily adapted to attack modes which can
process plaintexts of arbitrary length, but this requires a short case-by-case analysis
which we provide in Section 5. Note that the resulting adjustments have a negligible
impact on the complexity of our attack and do not impact its success probability.
8
Initial phase. The encryption and decryption algorithms start by an initial
phase. The key, the nonce and the associated data are processed by the initiali-
sation functionPinit. The state is set to the output ofPinit.
Plaintext processing.In encryption mode,DuplexAEAD then processes the
plaintext and generates the ciphertext block by block as follows:
1. The ciphertext block Ci is generated by XORing the outer state to the
plaintext blockMi. That is,Ci ← S ⊕ Mi.
2. The outer state is set to the just computed ciphertext block. That is,S ← Ci.
3. The permutationP is applied to the state. That is,S ← P(S).
Ciphertext processing. In decryption mode,DuplexAEAD then processes
the ciphertext. The plaintextM is constructed as the ciphertext is processed
but will only be outputted at the end of the final phase if the tag is valid. This
phase works as follows:
1. A plaintext blockMi is generated by XORing the outer state to the cipher-
text blockCi. That is,Mi ← S ⊕ Ci.
2. The outer state is set to the value of the ciphertext block. That is,S ← Ci.
3. The permutationP is applied to the state. That is,S ← P(S).
Final phase.During encryption (resp. decryption), plaintext (resp. ciphertext)
processing is followed by a final phase in which the finalisation functionPfinal
takes as input the state and computes aτ-bit tag. The encryption algorithm
returns a ciphertext and the corresponding tag. The decryption algorithm checks
whether the tag is valid. If so, it returns the plaintextM. Otherwise, it returns
⊥.
Domain separation.Actual duplex-based AE modes generally rely on domain
separation for their security. In the case ofDuplexAEAD, we assume that the
wayPinit and Pfinal are constructed fromP ensures domain separation between
the processing of (K, N), the processing of A, the processing of M and the
computation ofT. This can be done for example by XORing distinct constants
to the inner state beforeP invocations in each phase.
2.3 Security model
For authenticated encryption, two security notions are involved, namely privacy
and integrity. Since our attack aims at breaking integrity, we leave privacy aside.
We do not fully formalise the security model but give somesimplified reminders
to the reader.5 In the integrity setting, we have an adversaryA who has access
to the following oracles:
5For more details see for example [27].
9
- A primitive oracleOP that allows to call the public permutationP or its
inverse P−1. It takes as input a valuev ∈ Fb
2 and outputsP(v) ∈ Fb
2 (resp.
P−1(v) ∈ Fb
2) for a call made toP (resp. P−1).
- An encryption oracleOenc that takes as inputs a nonceN, associated data
A and a plaintextM and returns a ciphertextC and a tagT computed with
a secret keyK which is randomly sampled once for all (the same key is used
by the decryption oracle).6 It implements the encryption algorithm of the
analysed AEAD scheme based onP.
- A decryption oracleOdec that takes as input a nonceN, associated dataA,
a ciphertextC and a tagT and, using the keyK, returns the corresponding
plaintext if the verification is correct,⊥ otherwise. Similarly to the previ-
ous oracle, it implements the decryption algorithm of the analysed AEAD
scheme.
We assume that the adversaryA is nonce-respecting. Her goal is to provide
a forgery, that is, an input (N, A, C, T) such thatOdec(N, A, C, T) ̸= ⊥ where
(C, T) was not outputted by the encryption oracleOenc on an input(N, A,·)
(for any plaintext). The probability to provide a forgery has to be negligible.
As already mentioned in Section 1, we denote byqe, qd and qP the number
of queries done to respectively the encryption oracle, the decryption oracle and
the primitive oracle. We denote byσe the total number of plaintext blocks pro-
cessed by the encryption oracle and byσd the total number of ciphertext blocks
processed by the decryption oracle.
In this paper, we construct a generic forgery attack against several duplex-
based authenticated encryption modes. Our attack is generic in the sense that
we do not exploit the properties of the permutationP but only properties of
the mode itself [9]. It does not rely on nonce misuse or the release of unveri-
fied plaintext. For some modes, our attack also recovers the secret key with a
negligible amount of extra computation.
3 Description of the attack
In this section, we present a generic forgery attack against duplex-based authen-
ticated encryption modes. For the sake of clarity, we first describe how the attack
works on the simplified modeDuplexAEAD defined in Section 2.2. We show
how to apply our attack to other authenticated encryption modes in Section 5.
3.1 Observation on duplex-based AEAD modes
We describe a simple property ofDuplexAEAD that is shared with many other
duplex-based AE modes: for a ciphertext built by concatenating a fixed block
multiple times, the decryption of a plaintext consists in the iteration of a known
function with domain and co-domainFc
2. This property is at the core of our
attack. It is depicted in Figure 2.
6Each parameter space is well defined according to the analysed AEAD scheme.
10
Let ℓ ∈ N∗ and β ∈ Fr
2. Letβℓ be the ciphertext equal to the concatenation
of ℓ r-bit blocks of constant valueβ, that is
βℓ = β||···|| β| {z }
ℓ
.
During the ciphertext decryption, the value of the outer state at the input of
the state update functionP is equal to the current ciphertext block. Thus, the
decryption ofβℓ corresponds to the iteration of the functionPβ defined as
Pβ : Fc
2 −→ Fc
2
x 7−→ \P(β||x) .
Indeed, let x0 ∈ Fc
2 be the value of the inner state obtained at the end of the
initialphasefromthekey,thenonceandtheassociateddata.Afterprocessingthe
first plaintext block, the value of the outer state is equal to the first ciphertext
block β. Thus, the input of the state update function is exactlyβ||x0. As a
consequence, the value of the inner state going into the second application ofP
is β||x1 where x1 = Pβ(x0). In turn, the third one isβ||x2 where x2 = Pβ(x1) =
P2
β (x0). When the last plaintext block is constructed, right before the final phase,
the state is thus of the form
β||Pℓ−1
β (x0) =β||xℓ−1 .
Since the outer part of the state is equal toβ, it is known to the attacker. In
particular, to recover the value of the state before the final phase, an attacker
only needs to determine the value ofxℓ−1. SinceT = Pfinal (β||xℓ−1), it is suffi-
cient for the attacker to recover the value ofxℓ−1 to find a forgery(N, A, C, T).
As we will show more rigorously later on, our cryptanalysis relies on the fact
that without knowingx0, an attacker is able to selectβ and ℓ such that she is
able to both restrict and predict the space of all possiblexℓ−1 = Pℓ−1
β (x0) with
good probability.
3.2 High level description of the attack
Our attack aims at recovering the value ofxℓ−1. It was devised relying on the
random functions statistics introduced in Section 2.1. Indeed, letn = 2c. P is a
random permutation onFb
2 and c = b−r is significantly smaller thanb. Thus, for
any β randomly drawn fromFr
2, we expectPβ to behave as a function randomly
drawn fromFn.
The attack consists of two phases.
Precomputation phase. First, in a precomputation phase, an offline algorithm
finds a valueβ such thatG(Pβ) has a large component with a small cycle, that
is, a(s, ν)-component with greats and ν.
11
initial phase
(K, N)
A
Pinit
ciphertext processing
β
x0
P
β
x1
P
. . .
. . .
final phase
β
xℓ−1
Pfinal
T
Fig. 2.Decrypting βℓ.
Online phase. Second, in an online phase,(N, A, C, T) queries are submitted to
a decryption oracle, where the ciphertext isC = βℓ with ℓ sufficiently large and
β is the output of the precomputation algorithm. Recall thatβ is chosen such
that G(Pβ) has a large component with a small cycle. Since this component is
large, it contains the unknown nodex0 with good probability. In that case, for
a great enough value ofℓ, xℓ−1 belongs to the cycle of this component, which
is small. Thus, the number of all possible values forxℓ−1 is reduced and can be
efficiently exhausted by submitting(N, A, βℓ, T) queries to the decryption oracle
where
1. tags are produced by applyingPfinal to a state such thatS = β and such
that the inner statebS belongs to the small cycle ofPβ’s large component;
2. nonces are either randomly sampled or arbitrary distinct values;7
3. the associated data is set to the empty stringε.8
Our final attack, which balances the computational cost of the offline and
online phases, provides a forgery in timeO(2
3c
4 ) with a negligible amount of
memory. In the rest of this section, we provide a detailed description together
with an analysis of the complexity and success probability of our full attack.
Inourcomplexityandsuccessprobabilityanalysis,significanteffortswereput
towards limiting the use of heuristic assumptions. This is illustrated for example
by the use of the probability ps,ν [21] that a random function has a (s, ν)-
component rather than a heuristic estimation of this value from the probability
7In decryption queries, nonces can be repeated even in a nonce-respecting setting.
For the purpose of our attack,x0 needs to behave as a point randomly sampled in
the graph ofPβ. Thus, we can either require nonces to be randomly sampled or to be
arbitrary distinct values.
8For modes other than the full-state duplex, we could set the associated data to any
value. In the case of the full-state duplex, the associated data must be chosen carefully
(typically, the attack applies when the AD is set to the empty string).
12
pν that it has aν-component. Although we did not manage to get entirely rid
of all heuristic assumptions, we intended to back each assumption with heuristic
reasoning and/or small scale experiments.
3.3 Precomputation phase
In this section, we show how to construct an offline algorithm which outputsβ
such thatG(Pβ) has a large component with a small cycle. By ‘having a large
component with a small cycle’, we mean having a(s, ν)-component as defined in
Section 2.1. We will set the parameterss and ν to their final values later in the
paper. The offline algorithm also outputs the lengthµ of the(s, ν)-component’s
cycle, as well as an elemente of this cycle.
Our algorithm samples random valuesβ from Fr
2 and random valuesx in
Fc
2 and investigates whether or not the component on whichx is located is a
(s, ν)-component ofG(Pβ).
When a randomβ and a randomx are generated, we start by investigating
the cycle length of the component on whichx is located, that is, whether or
not it is a ν-component. Cycle-finding algorithms such as Floyd’s or Brent’s
algorithm provide a straightforward way to determine the component’s cycle
length. These algorithms are typically used to find collisions on functions with
a negligible amount of memory. In fact, the collisions found by these algorithms
are located within the functions’ cycles. Thus, given a randomβ ∈ Fr
2, which
selects a randomPβ ∈ Fn, and a randomx ∈ Fc
2, cycle-finding algorithms can
be used to construct an algorithm which outputs bothµ(x), the cycle length of
the connected component on whichx is located, and the value of a node in the
cycle [26]. We call such an algorithmcycle. The algorithm cycle allows the
attacker to determine whether or not the component on whichx is located is a
ν-component, i.e. a component with a cycle of the desired lengthµ(x) ≤ n
1
2 −ν .
To construct our final precomputation algorithm, two main issues remain to
be solved.
Issue 1. If the random β and the random x investigated are such that the
componentonwhich x islocatedisnota (s, ν)-component,itdoesnotnecessarily
mean thatG(Pβ) does not have a(s, ν)-component. There could be anx′ ̸= x
such thatx′ belongs to a different component that has the desired cycle length
and size. In particular, we must determine whether or not it is worth trying a
different x′ ̸= x when cycle returns a cycle length value that is greater than
n
1
2 −ν (x’scomponentisnota ν-component).Therearetwoimaginablestrategies.
The first strategy consists in trying a single randomx for eachβ, and, whenever
x has a component with a cycle size smaller thann
1
2 −ν, investigate whether or
not the component has size greater or equal thansn. The second strategy would
be to try severalx’s for each β. We stick to the first strategy. The following
argument indeed suggests that the second strategy would be more costly. When
conditioned by the failure of the first drawnx, the probability that a secondx′
succeedswiththesame β isatmost ps,ν(1−s)
1−ps,ν
whilstforanewrandom (β′, x′),the
13
probability of success is at leastps,νs. Thus, the first strategy is better whenever
s > 1
2−ps,ν
which is always true for our values ofs (which are always greater
than 0.5) andν.
Issue 2. Although cycle allows to detect ν-components, it does not provide
a way to detect(s, ν)-components. Being fully certain that aν-component has
the desired size would be prohibitingly costly. A strategy allowing to estimate
that a ν-component is a (s, ν)-component with a sufficiently large probability
has to be devised.9 The algorithmis_big implements this strategy. Note that
in this algorithm, the notation ‘(., z)’ in Step 4 means that the first output
(corresponding to the cycle length) is ignored. Each time the algorithm detects
a small cycle, it checks whether or notω other random nodes belong to the same
component. It then computes the proportionsobs of these new randomly chosen
pointswhichbelongtothedesiredcomponent.Ifthisnumberisaboveathreshold
value s + δ strictly larger thans, it decides thatx is likely to belong to a(s, ν)-
component and returnsβ and the values of the cycle. We show that forδ = 2.33
2√ω ,
a selected component has size greater thans with great probability. Suppose that
we have drawn a valueβ such thatβ has aν-component of unknown sizesβn.
In that case, the random variablesobs is the mean ofω Bernoulli variables which
are equal to1 with probabilitysβ and 0 with probability1 −sβ. By the Central
Limit Theorem (CLT), we have that for allϵ ∈ R,
p
"
sobs − sβ ≤ ϵ
r
sβ(1 − sβ)
ω
#
= p (Y ≤ ϵ)
where Y ⇝ N(0, 1). Thus, sinceδ = 2.33
q
1
4ω and since forsβ < 1, sβ(1−sβ) ≤
1
4 , we have that
sobs − sβ ≤ δ
with probabilitypδ ≥ p
 
Y ≤ 2.33

> 0.99. Suppose that for a randomβ with a
ν-component, we obtain a proportionsobs of randomx’s in this component such
that sobs ≥ s + δ as required in Step 10 of the algorithmis_big. We know that
with probabilitypδ ≥ 0.99:
sβ ≥ sobs − δ ≥ s + δ − δ = s .
As a conclusion, when our final offline algorithm offline_search returns a
β, then it is such thatG(Pβ) has a ν-component with probability1, and the
component considered has at least the desired size with probabilitypδ ≥ 0.99.
9Given a point of the graphx, the introduction of an algorithm which estimatesx’s
component’s size is going to significantly complicate our attack’s complexity analysis.
We believe that we could have designed an attack without this extra algorithm by
relying on the fact that a random component is large with great probability. However,
unless increasing the complexity of the online phase, we would have then obtained
lower success probabilities (roughly around0.5 rather than close to1).
14
Algo. offline_search(ω, s, ν)
1 : while true do
2 : β
$
← −Fr
2; x
$
← −Fc
2
3 : ( µ, e) ← cycle(β, x)
4 : if µ ≤ n
1
2 −ν then
5 : if is_big(ω, s, β, µ, e)
6 : return (β, µ, e)
Algo. is_big(ω, s, β, µ, e)
1 : δ ← 2.33
2√ω ; j ← 0
2 : for i = 1..ω do
3 : k ← 0; inside_big ← false; y
$
← −Fc
2
4 : ( ., z) ← cycle(β, y)
5 : while inside_big = false and k < µdo
6 : if z = e then inside_big ← true
7 : z ← Pβ(z)
8 : k ← k + 1
9 : if inside_big then j ← j + 1
10 : if j
ω ≥ s + δ return true
11 : return false
3.4 Analysis of the offline algorithm
In this section, we analyse the success probability and complexity of the offline
algorithm. As stated in Section 2.3, the complexity is expressed as a number
of calls toP. This algorithm is at the core of our attack. It only needs to be
executed once. Indeed, once it has succeeded in findingβ such thatG(Pβ) has a
(s, ν)-component, a duplex-based mode with any key using the permutationP
can be attacked.
Complexity of the cycle-finding algorithm.We start by investigating the
average complexity of the algorithmcycle. To construct this algorithm, we use
Brent’s cycle-detection algorithm as a tool [14]. For a randomβ ∈ Fr
2 and a
random x ∈ Fc
2, Brent’s algorithm recovers the cycle lengthµ(x) and a node
of the cycle e ∈ C(x) after at most 2 max(µ(x), λ(x)) +µ(x) applications of
Pβ. For a randomx, the cycle lengthµ(x) and the tail lengthλ(x) have the
same expectation ofpπn
8 [24] (See Section 2.1). Thus, we estimate the average
complexity ofcycle in number of calls toP to be upper bounded by
Tcycle = 3
rπn
8 .
Complexity of the offline algorithm.We wish to compute the complexity of
the offline algorithmoffline_search. First, the memory complexity is negligi-
ble. As for the time complexity, we compute the average number of applications
of P after which the algorithm returns a blockβ ∈ Fr
2.
First, we upper bound the average complexity ofis_big. This algorithm is
executed when a pair(β, x) such thatx is located on aν-component ofG(Pβ)
15
has been selected. It takes as inputβ, µ = µ(x) ≤ n
1
2 −ν, an elemente of the
cycle ofx’s component,s and an integerω. It performsω times a computation
that essentially consists in the generation of a random point ofG(Pβ), one com-
putation of the cycle algorithm, and at mostµ point comparisons andµ − 1 Pβ
invocations. The average complexity ofis_big is thus upper bounded by

Tcycle + n
1
2 −ν

ω .
The following estimation is heuristic, and implicitly relies on the assumption that
the average complexity ofcycle for a random point of a random function does
not significantly differ from the average complexity ofcycle for a random point
of a fixed random function that has aν-component. We provide a reasoning
to justify why it seems very unlikely that this assumption would significantly
distort the complexity at the end of the section.
We now compute the complexity ofoffline_search. First, we compute the
complexity of one single iteration of a Step 1 loop ofoffline_search. Recall
that pν is the probability for a random nodex ∈ Fc
2 of a random function to
belong to a ν-component. Each time a pair(β, x) is generated, the algorithm
cycle is executed. Then, the algorithm executesis_big when a pair is such
that x belongs to aν-component ofG(Pβ), which happens with probabilitypν.
Finally, we need to compute after how many Step 1 iterations the algorithm
returns a blockβ on average. At each iteration, the probability to generate a
random β ∈ Fr
2 such thatG(Pβ) has a (s, ν)-component is ps,ν. Given suchβ,
the probability that the randomly drawnx ∈ Fc
2 also belongs to this component
is greater thans. Thus, on average, we select a nodex in a (s, ν)-component
after less than 1
ps,νs iterations. Heuristically, one can thus expect the overall
complexity of our algorithm to be of the following form:
1
ps,νs
h
Tcycle + pν

Tcycle + n
1
2 −ν

ω
i
.
Yet, we need to adjust this expression. Recall that a(s, ν)-component is aν-
component of size greater or equal to sn. However, drawing a node in a ν-
component of size exactlysn10 is not enough to make the algorithm stop. Indeed,
if a randomly drawnβ ∈ Fr
2 is such thatG(Pβ) has aν-component of size exactly
sn, the probability thatsobs is greater thans + δ is smaller than1% (here, we
use the central limit theorem again). We thus need to adjust our computation.
To do so, we lower bound the probability that a random pair(β, x) is selected
by the probability that it satisfies the two following conditions:
(a) G(Pβ) has a(s+, ν)-component withs+ ≥ s + 2δ (recall thatδ = 2.33
2√ω ).
(b) x belongs to the(s+, ν)-component, so that the algorithmoffline_search
randomly drawsω other values inFc
2 and computessobs.
Indeed, we show that satisfying these two conditions implies thatsobs ≥ s + δ
with great probability, which is exactly the condition that needs to be satisfied
for the algorithm to returnβ.
10or greater thansn, but too close tosn to make the algorithm stop.
16
Assume that the algorithm randomly drawsβ ∈ Fr
2 and x ∈ Fc
2 such that
conditions (a) and (b) are satisfied. Then by the central limit theorem, we have
that for anyϵ ∈ R,
p
"
sobs − s+ ≥ ϵ
r
s+(1 − s+)
ω
#
= p (Y ≥ ϵ)
whereY ⇝ N(0, 1). Forϵ = −2.33, we thus have that with probabilitypδ ≥ 0.99,
sobs ≥ s+ − δ ≥ s + δ .
Thus, the probability that a randomly chosenβ is selected is lower bounded by
ps+,νs+pδ. It comes that the average complexity of the offline phase satisfies
Toffline ≤ 1
ps+,νs+pδ
h
Tcycle + pν

Tcycle + n
1
2 −ν

ω
i
= Tcycle
0.99
r π
2(1 − s+)s+ nν
"
1 +pνω
 
1 +n
1
2 −ν
Tcycle
!#
≤ n
1
2 +ν
s
2π
(1 − s+)s+

1 +pνω
 
1 +O(n−ν
= n
1
2 +ν
s
2π
(1 − s+)s+
"
1 +
√
2πω
2nν + O
 1
n2ν
#
=
"
1p
(1 − s+)s+
#h
n
1
2 +ν√
2π + n
1
2 ωπ + O

n
1
2 −ν
i
.
Fors+ = 0.73, ν= 1
4 , the last expression is equivalent to
q
2π
(1−s+)s+ n
3
4 < 6n
3
4 .
The previously mentioned heuristic assumption on the similarity of the aver-
age tail length of a random point of a random function that has aν-component
and the average tail length of a random point of a random function only under-
lies the second appearance ofTcycle in the first bound onToffline above. Even
if these two statistics differed non-negligibly, this would not significantly distort
the complexity. Sinceis_big is executed only when aν-component is detected,
Tcycle in its second occurence is multiplied bypνω ≪ 1 whilst it appears other-
wise on its own.
Success probability of the offline algorithm.We consider that the algo-
rithm is successful if the valueβ outputted by the offline algorithm is such that
Pβ has a(s, ν)-component. We have seen in Section 3.3 that when aβ is selected
(that is,sobs ≥ s + δ), the central limit theorem guarantees that the real size of
the ν-component investigated is greater thansn with probability pδ. It comes
that the success probability of the offline algorithmpoffline is equal topδ ≥ 0.99.
17
3.5 Online phase
In this section, we describe and analyse the online algorithmonline_algo. The
online phase consists in submitting(N, A, C, T) queries to the decryption oracle
Odec with C = βℓ where β has been outputted by the offline algorithm. In the
following, we describe how the tags are constructed and how we choose the value
of ℓ.
Algo. online_algo(β, e, µ, ℓ, m)
1 : for i = 1..m do
2 : N
$
← −Fη
2 ; y ← e
3 : for j = 1..µ do
4 : T ← Pfinal (β||y)
5 : if Odec(N, ε, βℓ, T) ̸= ⊥
6 : return (N, ε, βℓ, T)
7 : else y ← Pβ(y)
8 : return false
Recall that we denote byx0 the inner state at the end of the decryption’s
initial phase, and that when the ciphertextC is equal to βℓ, the state before
the final phase is equal toβ||Pℓ−1
β (x0). Recall thatβ, which has been outputted
by the offline algorithm, is such thatG(Pβ) has a large component with a small
cycle of this large component’s cycle. Since this component is large,x0 belongs to
it with great probability. In that case, one can chooseℓ large enough forPℓ
β(x0)
to be likely to reach the small cycle ofG(Pβ)’s large component. The number of
candidates for the state before the final phase, and thus for the possible tags, is
thereby reduced.
More formally, assume that the offline algorithm has been successful, that is,
it has outputtedβ, µ and e such thatG(Pβ) has a(s, ν)-component with a cycle
of length µ and such thate is an element of this cycle. IfG(Pβ) has a (s, ν)-
component, x0 belongs to this component with probability greater than or equal
to s. Ifx0 belongs to the(s, ν)-component, Pℓ−1
β (x0) reaches the cycle with the
probability pℓ introduced in Section 2.1. It comes that with probability at least
pℓs, Pℓ−1
β (x0) belongs to the cycle. Here, we implicitly rely on the assumption
that the random variable tail length of a random point of a random function such
that this random point belongs to a(s, ν)-component has the same distribution
as the tail length of a random point of a random function. Although we do not
believe this assumption to be true in the sense that the distributions are not
strictly equal, we believe that they are close enough for it not to impact our
attack significantly. Small scale experiments described in Section 4 corroborate
this assumption.
18
We now analyse Algorithmonline_algo. For a nonceN ∈ Fη
2, this online
phase consists in submitting the following(N, A, C, T) queries to the decryption
oracle:
 
N, ε, βℓ, Pfinal (β||Pi
β(e))

for i = 0, . . . , µ− 1 .
Time complexity. For each nonce, the attacker submitsµ decryption queries
with a ciphertext ofℓ blocks, and for each decryption query, she must also apply
Pfinal to the current stateβ||y where y is the current cycle element and apply
Pβ to y in order to try exhaustively all the cycle elements. Sinceℓ = O(n
1
2 ),
the time complexity incurred by the above invocations ofPβ and Pfinal at each
decryption query is negligible compared to the time complexity of a decryption
query with C = βℓ, that can be approximated by ℓ applications of P. The
time complexity for each nonce is thus well approximated byµℓ and thus upper
bounded by
n
1
2 −νℓ .
Thus, for m nonces, the average complexity of the online phase in number of
calls toP verifies
Tonline ≤ n
1
2 −νmℓ .
Probability of success.For each nonce, the probability of success is exactly the
probability thatPℓ−1
β (x0) belongs to the cycle which we showed to be at least
pℓs. If we repeat this experiment withm nonces, the probability of success is
thus at least
ponline = 1− (1 − pℓs)m .
3.6 Complexity and success probability of the attack
The complexity of the attack is the sum of the complexities of the online algo-
rithm and the offline algorithm. Note that in practice, the attacker only needs
to run the precomputation offline algorithm once in order to be able to execute
the online phase to attack the same duplex-based mode with any secret key. The
average complexityTonline + Toffline of the attack can be upper bounded by
n
1
2 −νmℓ +
"
1p
(1 − s+)s+
#h
n
1
2 +ν√
2π + n
1
2 ωπ
i
+ O

n
1
2 −ν

.
Similarly, the overall success probability of the attack is of the form
psuccess = pofflineponline ≥ pδ [1 − (1 − pℓs)m]
≥ 0.99(1 − e−mpℓs) (since ∀x ∈ R, e−x > 1 − x).
In order to have an overall probability of successpsuccess greater than0.95, we
want 1 − e−mpℓs to be greater than 0.96. Recall from Section 2.1 that pℓ ≥
1 − e
−l2
2n . We setℓ = 3√n so thatpℓ ≥ 0.988. We also set the following values:
19
• ω = 210; thus2δ = 2.33√ω < 0.08;
• s+ = 0.73; thuss = s+ − 2δ = 0.65.
Since pℓ ≥ 0.988 and s = 0.65, ponline is greater than0.96 for m ≥ 5. We thus
set m = 5. Thus, the complexity has the form
15n1−ν + 6n
1
2 +ν + 4π210
√
3 n
1
2 + O

n
1
2 −ν

.
To balance the above expression, we setν = 1
4 , we get an attack of complexity
at most21n
3
4 + O(√n) = 21× 2
3c
4 + O(√n) in number of calls toP.11
Note that the complexity of the online phase is at most15n1−ν. In particular,
given β such thatG(Pβ) has a component of size greater thanns with a cycle
length close to1, the online complexity can be brought close to2
c
2 +4.
3.7 Key-recovery
For modes such thatPinit is reversible for known nonce and associated data, our
forgery attack also recovers the secret key withℓ = O(√n) extra applications of
P, which is negligible compared to the complexity of the forgery. Indeed, if the
decryption oracle receives a forgery(N, A, C, T), it returns the corresponding
plaintext. This allows the attacker to recover the state at the end of the initial
phase with ℓ = O(√n) extra applications of P−1.12 As a consequence, if the
function Pinit is reversible for known nonce and associated data, the attacker
recovers the secret key.
4 Small scale experiments
Our attack relies on the assumption that thePβ’s derived from a public per-
mutation P defined on Fb
2 behave as random functions onFc
2. To statistically
verify this assumption, we implemented some experiments using the permuta-
tion Xoodoo[12] as P. The main reason behind this choice is its use in the
finalist of the NIST lightweight cryptography competitionXoodyak, but an-
other permutation used in practice with a reasonably large value ofb would
have done just as well. We took toy values compared toXoodyakfor the capac-
ity (c ≤ 40) in order for computer experiments to remain easy to achieve. Since
our attack relies mainly on the random function statistics results introduced in
Section 2.1, we designed a test for each of these results. We also implemented
the algorithmoffline_search for small values ofc.
11Note that ν = 1
4 is not the fully optimal choice in general. Rather, the optimal
choice forν is ν = 1
2

1
2 − logn
√
2π/(
p
s+(1 − s+)15)

. For example, forn = 2128,
the optimal choice is approximately0.256.
12The plaintext also allows to verify that the recovered state before the final phase
is correct, making the key recovery possible with only a negligible amount of extra
computations regardless of the tag length.
20
Algo. cycle_expectancy(Ω)
1 : tot ← 0
2 : for i = 1..Ω do
3 : β
$
← −Fr
2; x
$
← −Fc
2
4 : ( µ, e) ← cycle(β, x)
5 : tot ← tot + µ
6 : return tot/Ω
Algo. nu_components(Ω, ν)
1 : ctr ← 0
2 : for i = 1..Ω do
3 : β
$
← −Fr
2; x
$
← −Fc
2
4 : ( µ, e) ← cycle(β, x)
5 : if µ ≤ n
1
2 −ν then ctr ← ctr + 1
6 : return ctr/Ω
Expectancy of cycle/tail length.We wish to verify that for a randomβ ∈ Fr
2
and for a random nodex ∈ G(Pβ), the expectancy of the cycle lengthµ(x) and
tail length λ(x) are both equal topπn
8 , with n = 2c. Note that the variance
of the cycle length and tail length for a random node of a random function
is equal toσ2
µ = n
2
3 − 2π
16

[25]. Regarding the cycle length, we use the algo-
rithm cycle_expectancy. AfterΩ tries, by the Central Limit Theorem, the ob-
served average cycle lengthmean outputted by the algorithmcycle_expectancy
is such that with probability about0.99:
mean ∈
rπn
8 − 2.58σµ√
Ω
;
rπn
8 + 2.58σµ√
Ω

.
Setting Ω = 14000, we verify whethermean is in this interval in our tests (see
Table 1). We use a similar algorithm and reasoning for the tail length.13 As
shown in Table 1, all our experimental results match the theory.
c 28 32 36 40
Expectancy 10267 41068 164274 657098
Confidence interval [10080, 10454] [40321, 41817] [161283, 167266] [645130, 669065]
tail mean 10323 40971 163732 654775
cycle mean 10255 41620 164445 650156
Table 1.Expectancy of cycle length and tail length
Probability for a random point to belong to aν-component. We wish
to verify that for a randomβ ∈ Fr
2 and for a random node x ∈ G(Pβ), the
13Here, we make the assumption that the standard deviation for the tail length is the
same as the cycle length’s. This assumption does not affect our attack, it only affects
how to interpret our test results.
21
probability that x belongs to aν-component is pν. To do so, we use the algo-
rithm nu_components and focus in practice on experiments whereν = 1
4 as it is
the value used in our attack. DrawingΩ random (x, β) pairs and computing the
proportion of such pairs such thatx belongs to aν-component of Pβ amounts
to computing the mean ofΩ Bernoulli variables equal to1 with probabilitypν
and 0 with probability1−pν. By the Central Limit Theorem, since the standard
variation of the above variables isσν =
p
pν(1 − pν), we have that
proportion ∈

pν − 2.58σν√
Ω
; pν + 2.58σν√
Ω

with probability≥ 0.99. We verify in our experiments thatproportion is indeed
in this confidence interval for various values ofc and Ω. Our results, which match
the theory, are displayed in Table 2.
c 28 32 36 40
Ω 71344 142688 285376 570752
ν-component
Expectancy 0.009792 0.004896 0.002448 0.0012
Conf. interval[0.0088,0.0110][0.0044,0.0054][0.0022,0.0027][0.0011,0.0013]
proportion 0.010162 0.004787 0.002400 0.001242
(s, ν)-component
ps+,νs+pδ 0.002740 0.001370 0.000685 0.000342
ps,νs 0.002973 0.001487 0.000743 0.000372
frequency 0.003714 0.001647 0.000880 0.000517
Table 2.Probability for a random node in the graph of a random function to belong
to aν-component and experimental verification of (the detection of) the occurence of
(s, ν)-components.
Probabilityforarandomfunctiontohavea (s, ν)-component. Verifying
that for a randomβ ∈ Fr
2, the probability thatG(Pβ) has a(s, ν)-component is
ps,ν is hard in practice as it is too costly to determine with probability1 whether
or notG(Pβ) has a(s, ν)-component. Instead, we make an indirect verification.
We drawΩ random (x, β) pairs and compute the proportionfrequency of such
pairs such that:
– Pβ has aν-component (the component to whichx belongs);
– the estimated sizesobs of this component (given by the proportion, among
ω = 1000, of newly chosen random points that belong to this component) is
22
at leasts + δ with δ = 2.33
2√ω , so that the actual size of the component is very
likely to be at leastsn.14
We compare the foundfrequency values with two values:
– the lower boundps,νs on the probability thatPβ has a(s, ν)-component and
x belongs to it;
– the conservative lower boundps+,νs+pδ on the average value offrequency
used in the complexity estimate of the offline algorithm of Section 3.4, where
s+ = s + 2δ.
This algorithm is easy to derive from the algorithmoffline_search introduced
in Section 3.3. We make this experiment for various values ofΩ and c and with
s = 0.65, s+ = 0.73, as they are the values used in our attack. Our results
match the theory and are displayed in Table 2. The difference (in favour of the
adversary) between theoretical bounds and experimental values forfrequency
in Table 2 can be at least partially explained as follows. The valueps,ν is the
probability that a component is aν-component of sizegreater or equalto s. The
probability that a random point belongs to a(s, ν)-component is thus strictly
greater thanps,νs as the proportion of the points belonging to a component of
size greater thans is greater thans.
c β (b − c bits) µ
28
1473b86a 2607d6e5 5234df22 4c111c51 122e188f 37586e28
10
5b74f306 40ac1d69 2bb9c59f 6e8479b7 3d6ec314 7
32
67b9632a 032ec1a3 1f3b4f8c 7c641f59 39e3cab6 3aaa4444
4
73bf377d 7f1f6b35 6412ffb2 523d5180 54465a4f
36
59189691 3e3769f2 293b1b6f 0cc0af85 7d96b0a4 0e1c201b
122
137523e8 11f61a60 6c06c85f 762716b7 276c730
40
7b2fb641 7874c3d6 171abbc2 231ebf22 4e6e1ad3 2d6df079
18
7e6457aa 7816dd2a 011fe0f3 1de6ee24 56f1ed
Table 3.We provide a few examples of obtainedβ values such thatPβ has a(s, ν)-
component withµ ≪ 2
c
4 . Although we only provide one for eachc, several values ofβ
are available for eachc.
14To reduce the execution time of the implementation, to detect whether or not two
points x, x′ are in the same component, we checked whetherµ(x) = µ(x′) instead of
doing the exhaustive verification made inis_big.
23
Some values ofβ. Lastly, we implemented the algorithmoffline_search for
small values of c and for s = 0.65. A few examples of obtainedβ values are
displayed in Table 3.
Probability for a random point to belong to its component’s cycle
after ℓ − 1 applications of the random function.In order to verify the
applicability of Harris’ result on the number of successors provided in Section 2.1
to points randomly drawn in a(s, ν)-component, a fortioriwhen the function is
randomly sampled from the set of allPβ’s rather than randomly sampled inFn,
we also conducted the following experiment. For allβ values displayed in Table 3,
we checked whether the points that were found to be in the(s, ν)-component
had a tail length smaller thanℓ = 3√n. For all theseβ, 100% of the points found
to be in the(s, ν)-component have a tail length smaller thanℓ. This gives us
reasonable confidence in the fact that this assumption is realistic and does not
lead to a significant overestimation of the success probability of the attack.
5 Application to concrete duplex-based modes
In this section, we apply the attack previously described on the simplifiedDu-
plexAEAD mode to concrete AEAD duplex-based modes. Whilst our attack
can be easily adapted to many of them as summarized in Table 5, others frus-
trate our attack. For all the modes presented in Table 5, our attack enables key
recovery.
5.1 Highlights
For the attack to succeed, we identify two requirements:
1. In decryption mode, the ciphertext blocks must overwrite the outer state at
least in part;
2. The tag must be determined by the state before the final phase, in such a
way that a correct guess on this state gives us the correct tag.
As a consequence, we will show that in all modes for which the attack is
applicable, the padding rule applied to the message does not matter, even though
when the padding rule is made block by block the complexity of our attack can
be slightly greater.
As a main concrete implication, we provide an attack onXoodyak that
breaks the claim of achieving 184-bit security against plaintext recovery and
forgery attacks made by the designers in [18, Corollary 2, p. 72] but does not
threaten the 112-bit security level required by NIST for the lightweight compe-
tition. The attack also breaks the penultimateNORX version NORX v2 [1] but not
the more recent versionNORX v3 [2].
Secondly we highlight two reasons that prevent our attack from applying to
modes such as Beetle [16], Ascon [22] orNORX v3 [2] in Section 5.3. We mainly
identify two reasons:
24
Mode monkeyWrap/monkeyDuplex Cyclist Motorist
Scheme NORX v2(3) Ketje KNOT Xoodyak Keyak
Instance N-32 N-64 Jr Sr Mi Ma KNOT-AEAD Xoodyak River Lake
b 512 1024 200 400 800 1600 256 384 384 512 384 800 1600
r 384 768 16 32 128 256 64 192 96 128 192 544 1344
r′ (1) 382 766 14 30 126 254 64 192 96 128 192 544 1344
c 128 256 184 368 672 1344 192 192 288 384 192 256 256
Sec. level(2) 128 256 96 128 128 128 125 128 189 253 184 128 128
T 2102 2198 2144 2282 2506 21014 2148 2148 2220 2292 2148 2196 2196
Table 4.Summary of our results. Our attack is the best known generic attack against
the modes displayed in blue;(1)r′ is the length of the outer state part that is overwritten
by ciphertext blocks taking into a account a potential block by block padding such
as in monkeyDuplex;(2)Claimed plaintext integrity security level for a key and tag
of sufficient, potentially maximal, length;(3)Note that a more efficient (although not
generic) attack has been devised in [15].
– the use of a linear application that prevents outer state overwriting such as
the feedback functionproposed in the Beetle mode [16] (requirement 1 is not
fulfilled);15
– the use of the secret key in the final phase to produce the tag such as in Ascon
and NORX v3 [22,2]. Indeed, in that case, a correct guess on the state before
the final phase does not determine the tag (requirement 2 is not fulfilled).
5.2 Schemes to which the attack can be applied
The attack is applicable to the following duplex-based constructions: the Cy-
clist, monkeyDuplex and Motorist modes. Therefore, the attack is applicable to
Xoodyak, Ketje, KNOT, NORX v2 and Keyak. This section is made to help
the reader check attack details for all AEAD algorithms on which the attack is
applicable.
15Although the first mode that uses a feedback function is COFB [17], this mode is
out of scope as it is not duplex-based (in fact, it is not even permutation-based but
block-cipher based).
25
Cyclist mode. A well known representative of the family of duplex-based ci-
phers isXoodyak [18], a finalist of the NIST lightweight cryptography compe-
tition.16 Xoodyak uses the permutationXoodoo as its state update function.
As explained in Section 3.5, the specification of the initial phase does not
influence the applicability of the attack. Hence, we only focus on the ciphertext
processing and the final phase. After the initial phase, a byte is set to‘80‘ and
is XORed into the state, but this is only the case for the first block. Thus, we
consider that the processing of the first ciphertext block belongs to the initial
phase. Moreover, each time a ciphertext block overwrites the outer state, a byte
set to‘01‘ is XORed into the state at the bit positionsr + 1, . . . , r+ 817, where
r = 24bytes = 192bits [18, p. 68]. Thus, the permutationP on which we need
to applyoffline_search is
P : F384
2 −→ F384
2
s 7−→Xoodoo[12](s ⊕ 0192||07||1||0184) .
If one considers the padding rule10∗ together with the interface provided by the
Xoodyakauthors, one can notice that all those transformations are determinis-
tic in the value of the inner state just before processing the last ciphertext block.
Hence, we can guess the last state value, and apply the final phase (consider-
ing the padding for the last block inside this transformation) to the last block
and apply the attack. This means that for any tag length, our attack strategy
provides a forgery with a complexity of2148.4.
When a valid decryption query is provided to the decryption oracle, the
corresponding plaintext is returned. The plaintext allows the attacker to check
that her guess on the state before the final phase is correct as she can invert the
whole process. Doing so, she can also recover the state just after processing the
key. As long as the key is smaller than 44 bytes, it is copied entirely in the state
and thenA, N and M are processed. Thus,Pinit is reversible for knownN and
A. As described in Section 3.7 the attack can thus be turned into a key recovery
for Xoodyak.
For at-byte tag and aκ-bit secret key withκ ≤ 192, the authors claim that
Xoodyak has a security strength level in bits ofmin(184, κ,8t) in computation
wherethedataislimitedto 96+κ/2.Ourattackbreaksthisclaimfor κ ≥ 152 and
t ≥ 19. Our attack not only produces a forgery but also recovers the secret key.
Typically, forκ = 192and t = 24, there should be no attack with a complexity
under 2184 in time and2192 in data. Yet, our attack has a complexity of2148.4.
MonkeyDuplex: Ketje, KNOT andNORX v2. Ketje [12], KNOT-AEAD
[34] andNORX v2 [1] use the mode monkeyDuplex defined originally in 2014 for
16For more details onXoodyak’s specification, we refer to [18] at page 62 for the
keyed mode together with pages 67 and 68 for the full description of what is relevant
for our analysis.https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/lightweight-cryptography/
17Notethattheratecalled r inthispaperisdenotedby n inXoodyak’sspecification.
26
Ketje [11]. However, those algorithms differ in the padding rule applied to the
message.
– In KNOT-AEAD, the padding is made by ‘appending a single 1 and the
smallest number of 0’s to the bit string such that the length of the padded
bit string is a multiple ofr bits’. Thus, the technique used forXoodyakcan
be applied.
– In Ketje and in NORX, the padding is made block by block [12, 1.3, p. 4]
and [1, p. 9-10] with the rule pad10∗1[r](|M|) which is the multi-rate padding
as defined in [7]. Both ciphers allow to process bit strings of length smaller
or equal18 to r′ = r − 2. To deal with this padding rule, we consider that
every plaintext block is of length exactlyr′, meaning that the padding rule
is just the concatenation of11 to each block. By doing the same technique
together with the domain separation as forXoodyak, that is considering
that the position corresponding to those two bits are in fact inside the inner
state and that the XOR of11 is part of theKetje inner permutationP (or
part of theNORX inner permutation), we can apply our attack, by considering
the effective rate to ber′ = r − 2 instead ofr.
For these three constructions, the final phase is deterministic in the inner
state after processing the plaintext or the ciphertext so our attack can be ap-
plied. Both ciphers come with 4 different instances and our attack leads to the
complexities listed in Table 5. Moreover, when the decryption oracle sends back
the plaintext, a key recovery is possible as the state is directly initialized with
key and nonce without applying any transformation.
Motorist:Keyak. Keyak[13]isafamilyofauthenticatedencryptionschemes
which is a third-round candidate of the CAESAR competition. The features of
the Motorist mode that are of interest for our attack are:
– Decryption overwrites the outer state with ciphertext blocks values and in
between there are applications ofP where P is aKeccak-p permutation.
– An encoding (in byte) of the size of the processed message blocks is XORed
into the state at theRa + 1byte position, whereRa is the absorbing rate in
bytes (Ra = r
8 ).
– For the tag generation, given a (public) tag length, the tag is determined by
the state before the final phase.
Thus, the attack can also be applied onKeyakinstances by just changing the
function that is iterated and considering the XOR of the bytes that encode the
length of ciphertext and associated data to be part of the decryption function.
However, Keyak comes with instances that can work independently (Pis-
tons), in order to highly parallelize encryption and decryption of large amount
of data. To do so, the authors ofKeyak propose to do several initialization in
parallel, process independently 4, 8 or more strings and then mix everything
18This value is calledρmax in [7, p. 335]
27
together at the end. However, if one would like to guess the tag, one would have
to guess independently every inner state in all parallel instances as they are all
initialized differently. So, our attack onKeyak is also applicable on all instances
but make sense only for the non-parallelized instances, that isRiver Keyak
and Lake Keyak. For these instances, the key can also be recovered.
5.3 Modes that frustrate our attack
In this section, we will look into authenticated encryption modes to which the
attack cannot be applied. Two main features frustrate our cryptanalysis. The
first one consists of a final key addition just at the beginning of the final phase
and the second one is the use of afeedback functionas proposed in the mode
Beetle [16].
Key-dependent final phase. Our attack allows to reduce the space of all
possible values of the final state before the final phase. For the modes to which
the attack applies, a correct guess on this state can be transformed into a forgery,
and, under certain conditions, into a key recovery. However, some proposals
such as Ascon [22] or the third version ofNORX [2] for the CAESAR competition
slightly change the final phase by making it not only dependent on the state after
processing the plaintext or ciphertext, but also key dependent. As explained at
the beginning of this section, the final tag must be fully determined by the state
just before the final phase. When the key is involved in the final phase, even if
the correct state value is guessed, an attacker does not knowa priorithe secret
key and so the state recovery does not lead to a forgery attack.
Absence of outer state overwriting.In another line of research, Chakraborti
et al. proposed in 2018 a family of AEAD constructions named Beetle [16]. Beetle
is not strictly speaking a duplex-based construction as the use of afeedback
function between two consecutive invocations of the permutationP avoids, when
both a data injection and a data extraction take place, that ther-bit outer
state value after the data injection be equal to the extracted data block as
in traditional duplexing, and allows to render both values almost independent.
Thus, the use of a feedback function prevents the attack by making the outer
state overwriting impossible. Unlike duplex-based constructions which do not use
a feedback function twist, the Beetle construction is claimed to provide a security
level min{b
2 , c− log(r), r} without any restriction on decryption queries [16,3].
The Beetle construction is used in the Beetle and SPARKLE [5] finalists of the
NIST lightweight cryptography standardization process.
The same effect also occurs in Subterranean 2.0 [19] which is a second round
candidate of the NIST-lightweight competition and a duplex-like proposal. In
order to generate the ciphertext blocks, two bits of the state are XORed to serve
as a keystream. It prevents the attack in the same way that the feedback function
of the Beetle mode does, as the attacker can not predict the value of the outer
state before the next application of the update function.
28
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we provided a generic attack against several duplex-based AEAD
modes. Constructed as a forgery attack, our cryptanalysis can be transformed
into a key recovery for most modes to which it applies. It has a complexity equiv-
alent toO(2
3c
4 ) applications of the state update function and thus represents an
improvement from previous generic attacks against duplex-based modes. It is
also memory-less. Further, the complexity of the online phase can be brought
close to2
c
2 at the cost of increasing the time complexity of the pre-computation
phase (which needs to be run only once) aboveO(2
3c
4 ).
Acknowledgements. We wish to thank Jérôme Plût and Hugues Randriam
for our insightful conversations on the statistics of random functions.
References
1. Aumasson, J.P., Jovanovic, P., Neves, S.: NORX v2. Submission to the Caesar
competition (2015),https://competitions.cr.yp.to/round2/norxv20.pdf
2. Aumasson, J.P., Jovanovic, P., Neves, S.: NORX v3. Submission to the Caesar
competition (2016),https://competitions.cr.yp.to/round3/norxv30.pdf
3. Banik, S., Chakraborti, A., Iwata, T., Minematsu, K., Nandi, M., Peyrin, T.,
Sasaki, Y., Sim, S.M., Todo, Y.: GIFT-COFB. Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report
2020/738 (2020),https://eprint.iacr.org/2020/738
4. Bao, Z., Guo, J., Wang, L.: Functional graphs and their applications in generic at-
tacks on iterated hash constructions. IACR Transactions on Symmetric Cryptology
2018(1), 201–253 (2018). doi:10.13154/tosc.v2018.i1.201-253
5. Beierle, C., Biryukov, A., Cardoso dos Santos, L., Großschädl, J., Perrin, L.,
Udovenko, A., Velichkov, V., Wang, Q.: Lightweight AEAD and hashing using
the Sparkle permutation family. IACR Transactions on Symmetric Cryptology
2020(S1), 208–261 (2020). doi:10.13154/tosc.v2020.iS1.208-261
6. Bertoni, G., Daemen, J., Peeters, M., Van Assche, G.: On the indifferentiability of
the sponge construction. In: Smart, N.P. (ed.) Advances in Cryptology – EURO-
CRYPT2008.LectureNotesinComputerScience,vol.4965,pp.181–197.Springer,
Heidelberg, Germany, Istanbul, Turkey (Apr 13–17, 2008). doi:10.1007/978-3-540-
78967-3_11
7. Bertoni, G., Daemen, J., Peeters, M., Van Assche, G.: Duplexing the sponge:
Single-pass authenticated encryption and other applications. In: Miri, A., Vau-
denay, S. (eds.) SAC 2011: 18th Annual International Workshop on Selected Ar-
eas in Cryptography. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 7118, pp. 320–
337. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, Toronto, Ontario, Canada (Aug 11–12, 2012).
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-28496-0_19
8. Bertoni, G., Daemen, J., Peeters, M., Assche, G.V.: Sponge functions (2007),
https://keccak.team/files/SpongeFunctions.pdf
9. Bertoni, G., Daemen, J., Peeters, M., Assche, G.V.: Cryptographic sponge func-
tions (2011),https://keccak.team/files/CSF-0.1.pdf
10. Bertoni, G., Daemen, J., Peeters, M., Assche, G.V.: Permutation-based en-
cryption, authentication and authenticated encryption (July 2012),http://www.
hyperelliptic.org/djb/diac/record.pdf
29
11. Bertoni, G., Daemen, J., Peeters, M., Assche, G.V., Keer, R.V.: Ketje v1. Sub-
mission to Caesar competition (2014),http://competitions.cr.yp.to/round1/
ketjev1.pdf
12. Bertoni, G., Daemen, J., Peeters, M., Assche, G.V., Keer, R.V.: Ketje v2. Round
3 candidate for the Caesar competition (2016),http://competitions.cr.yp.to/
round3/ketjev2.pdf
13. Bertoni, G., Daemen, J., Peeters, M., Assche, G.V., Keer, R.V.: Keyak v2. Submis-
sion to the Caesar competition (2016),https://competitions.cr.yp.to/round3/
keyakv22.pdf
14. Brent, R.P.: An improved monte carlo factorization algorithm. In:
BIT Numerical Mathematics. p. 176–184. Berlin, Heidelberg (1980).
doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01933190
15. Chaigneau, C., Fuhr, T., Gilbert, H., Jean, J., Reinhard, J.R.: Cryptanal-
ysis of NORX v2.0. Journal of Cryptology 32(4), 1423–1447 (Oct 2019).
doi:10.1007/s00145-018-9297-9
16. Chakraborti, A., Datta, N., Nandi, M., Yasuda, K.: Beetle family of
lightweight and secure authenticated encryption ciphers. IACR Transac-
tions on Cryptographic Hardware and Embedded Systems 2018(2), 218–241
(2018). doi:10.13154/tches.v2018.i2.218-241, https://tches.iacr.org/index.
php/TCHES/article/view/881
17. Chakraborti, A., Iwata, T., Minematsu, K., Nandi, M.: Blockcipher-based authen-
ticated encryption: How small can we go? In: Fischer, W., Homma, N. (eds.) Cryp-
tographic Hardware and Embedded Systems – CHES 2017. Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, vol. 10529, pp. 277–298. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, Taipei,
Taiwan (Sep 25–28, 2017). doi:10.1007/978-3-319-66787-4_14
18. Daemen, J., Hoffert, S., Peeters, M., Van Assche, G., Van Keer, R.: Xoodyak, a
lightweight cryptographic scheme. IACR Transactions on Symmetric Cryptology
2020(S1), 60–87 (2020). doi:10.13154/tosc.v2020.iS1.60-87
19. Daemen, J., Massolino, P.M.C., Mehrdad, A., Rotella, Y.: The subterranean 2.0
cipher suite. IACR Transactions on Symmetric Cryptology 2020(S1), 262–294
(2020). doi:10.13154/tosc.v2020.iS1.262-294
20. Daemen, J., Mennink, B., Assche, G.V.: Full-state keyed duplex with built-in
multi-user support. In: Takagi, T., Peyrin, T. (eds.) Advances in Cryptology –
ASIACRYPT 2017, Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 10625, pp.
606–637. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, Hong Kong, China (Dec 3–7, 2017).
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-70697-9_21
21. DeLaurentis,J.M.:Componentsandcyclesofarandomfunction.In:Pomerance,C.
(ed.) Advances in Cryptology – CRYPTO’87. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 293, pp. 231–242. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, Santa Barbara, CA, USA
(Aug 16–20, 1988). doi:10.1007/3-540-48184-2_21
22. Dobraunig, C., Eichlseder, M., Mendel, F., Schläffer, M.: Ascon v1.2: Lightweight
authenticated encryption and hashing. Journal of Cryptology34(3), 33 (Jul 2021).
doi:10.1007/s00145-021-09398-9
23. Flajolet, P., Odlyzko, A.M.: Random mapping statistics. In: Quisquater, J.J., Van-
dewalle, J. (eds.) Advances in Cryptology – EUROCRYPT’89. Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, vol. 434, pp. 329–354. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany,
Houthalen, Belgium (Apr 10–13, 1990). doi:10.1007/3-540-46885-4_34
24. Flajolet, P., Sedgewick, R.: Analytic Combinatorics. Cambridge University
Press (2009), http://www.cambridge.org/uk/catalogue/catalogue.asp?isbn=
9780521898065
30
25. Harris, B.: Probability Distributions Related to Random Mappings. The Annals of
Mathematical Statistics31(4), 1045 – 1062 (1960). doi:10.1214/aoms/1177705677,
https://doi.org/10.1214/aoms/1177705677
26. Joux, A.: Algorithmic Cryptanalysis. Chapman and Hall/CRC (2009).
doi:https://doi.org/10.1201/9781420070033
27. Jovanovic, P., Luykx, A., Mennink, B.: Beyond2c/2 security in sponge-based au-
thenticated encryption modes. In: Sarkar, P., Iwata, T. (eds.) Advances in Cryp-
tology – ASIACRYPT 2014, Part I. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8873,
pp. 85–104. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, Kaoshiung, Taiwan, R.O.C. (Dec 7–11,
2014). doi:10.1007/978-3-662-45611-8_5
28. Jovanovic,P.,Luykx,A.,Mennink,B.,Sasaki,Y.,Yasuda,K.:Beyondconventional
security in sponge-based authenticated encryption modes. Journal of Cryptology
32(3), 895–940 (Jul 2019). doi:10.1007/s00145-018-9299-7
29. Leurent, G., Peyrin, T., Wang, L.: New generic attacks against hash-based MACs.
In:Sako,K.,Sarkar,P.(eds.)AdvancesinCryptology–ASIACRYPT2013,PartII.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8270, pp. 1–20. Springer, Heidelberg,
Germany, Bengalore, India (Dec 1–5, 2013). doi:10.1007/978-3-642-42045-0_1
30. Mennink, B., Reyhanitabar, R., Vizár, D.: Security of full-state keyed sponge and
duplex: Applications to authenticated encryption. In: Iwata, T., Cheon, J.H. (eds.)
Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2015, Part II. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 9453, pp. 465–489. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, Auckland, New
Zealand (Nov 30 – Dec 3, 2015). doi:10.1007/978-3-662-48800-3_19
31. Moon, J.W.: Counting Labelled Trees. Canadian Mathematical Congress 1970,
William Clowes and Sons (1970)
32. Peyrin, T., Sasaki, Y., Wang, L.: Generic related-key attacks for HMAC. In: Wang,
X., Sako, K. (eds.) Advances in Cryptology – ASIACRYPT 2012. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 7658, pp. 580–597. Springer, Heidelberg, Germany, Beijing,
China (Dec 2–6, 2012). doi:10.1007/978-3-642-34961-4_35
33. Peyrin, T., Wang, L.: Generic universal forgery attack on iterative hash-based
MACs. In: Nguyen, P.Q., Oswald, E. (eds.) Advances in Cryptology – EURO-
CRYPT2014.LectureNotesinComputerScience,vol.8441,pp.147–164.Springer,
Heidelberg, Germany, Copenhagen, Denmark (May 11–15, 2014). doi:10.1007/978-
3-642-55220-5_9
34. Zhang, W., Ding, T., Yang, B., Bao, Z., Xiang, Z., Ji, F., Zhao, X.: KNOT.
Round 2 candidate for the NIST Lightweight Cryptography project (2019),
https://csrc.nist.gov/CSRC/media/Projects/lightweight-cryptography/
documents/round-2/spec-doc-rnd2/knot-spec-round.pdf
31
