Farfalle: parallel permutation-based cryptography
Guido Bertoni3, Joan Daemen1,2, Seth Hoffert,
Michaël Peeters1, Gilles Van Assche1 and Ronny Van Keer1
1 STMicroelectronics
2 Radboud University
3 Security Pattern
Abstract. In this paper, we introduce Farfalle, a new permutation-based construction
for building a pseudorandom function (PRF). The PRF takes as input a key and a
sequence of arbitrary-length data strings, and returns an arbitrary-length output. It
has a compression layer and an expansion layer, each involving the parallel application
of a permutation. The construction also makes use of LFSR-like rolling functions for
generating input and output masks and for updating the inner state during expansion.
On top of the inherent parallelism, Farfalle instances can be very efﬁcient because
the construction imposes less requirements on the underlying primitive than, e.g.,
the duplex construction or typical block cipher modes. Farfalle has an incremental
property: compression of common preﬁxes of inputs can be factored out. Thanks to
its input-output characteristics, Farfalle is really versatile. We specify simple modes
on top of it for authentication, encryption and authenticated encryption, as well as
a wide block cipher mode. As a showcase, we present KRAVATTE, a very efﬁcient
instance of Farfalle based on KECCAK -p[1600, nr] permutations and formulate concrete
security claims against classical and quantum adversaries. The permutations in the
compression and expansion layers of KRAVATTE have only 6 rounds apiece and the
rolling functions are lightweight. We provide a rationale for our choices and report on
software performance.
Keywords:pseudorandom function · permutation-based cryptography · KECCAK
1 Introduction
Until recently, symmetric cryptography was dominated by block ciphers. With the excep-
tion of some dedicated stream ciphers, standards and commercial products performed
encryption, authentication, authenticated encryption on top of a block cipher, often the
AES [23], and even hashing is done with block-cipher-based modes. For a couple of
decades, a lot of innovation has been brought to block cipher-based cryptography in the
form of the deﬁnition of new modes, particularly for authentication and authenticated
encryption.
Upon closer inspection of these modes, one can see a tendency towards modes that do
not use the inverse mapping of the block cipher. Remarkably, the support for this inverse
mapping imposes a separation of the processing of the b = k + n bits of the input, with k
the key length and n the block size. Namely, the key is processed in a key schedule and the
data in the data path, and there can be no diffusion from the data path to the key schedule.
This strongly limits the potential diffusion as illustrated by the birthday bounds in both
block size (most modes are only secure up to 2b/2 block cipher queries with b the block
length) and key length (security against multi-target attacks in absence of global nonces is
only 2k/2 with k the key length). So we think using a block cipher in a mode that does not
use its inverse is a waste. Well-known examples of block cipher-based functions that do
not use the inverse mapping are counter mode encryption and any block cipher-based
authentication. In addition, the NIST hash function standards SHA-1 and SHA-2 [47, 48]
can be seen as building on top of block ciphers without the need of the inverse mapping.
As opposed to block ciphers, cryptographic permutations do not make a distinction
between key and data input and hence do not suffer from this limitation. Their use
gained popularity in the years 2000, in particular during the SHA-3 competition, as
several candidates were based on this type of primitive. Furthermore, the selection of
the permutation-based KECCAK sponge function as the SHA-3 standard gave increased
visibility to this type of cryptographic primitive [12, 49]. We introduced the concept of
sponge functions in 2007, initially aimed at hashing, although soon after we developed
modes for efﬁcient encryption, authentication and authenticated encryption. For the latter
we had to do some refactoring, leading to the (full-state) keyed duplex construction [22].
Today, sponge-based cryptography has become a full-ﬂedged alternative to its block
cipher-based counterpart.
Yet, the sponge and duplex constructions are inherently serial. The bulk of the compu-
tation consists of the repeated evaluation of a permutation, and for every evaluation
we need the output of the previous one. Modern high-end CPUs are so powerful that
evaluating n permutations simultaneously is faster than evaluating them in sequence. For
hashing, optimal performances can be obtained by using tree hashing. A concrete example
of a hash function that can exploit a high degree of parallelism isKANGAROO TWELVE [16].
For separate authentication or encryption, similar techniques can be applied. However,
for duplex-based authenticated encryption, the amount of available parallelism must be
known in advance. An example of a mode for authenticated encryption that supports
conﬁgurable parallelism is Motorist, the mode underlying K EYAK [15].
Also, the sponge and duplex constructions limit the number of output bits per evaluation
of the permutation to r = b −c, with b the width of the permutation and c a parameter,
called the capacity, that determines the security strength. Depending on the mode of use
and the adversary’s capabilities, in order to achieve s bits of security, one must take c
somewhere between s and 2s. Consequently, for a security strength of 128 bits, the rate
r is 128 to 256 bits smaller than the permutation width. This restricts the underlying
permutation to have some minimum width, and for relatively small widths the efﬁciency
is not optimal.
To address these concerns, we set out to deﬁne a parallelizable counterpart for sponge-
based cryptography. The ambition quickly became to have permutation-based modes for
all keyed operations in symmetric cryptography that can exploit arbitrary parallelism and
that can make use of permutations as small as the birthday bound (b = 2s). We called the
result Farfalle.
Similarly to sponges, the Farfalle offering is built around a (composite) primitive and
modes on top of it. This primitive is a pseudorandom function (PRF) that takes as input a
key and a string (or a sequence of strings), and produces an arbitrary-length output. To an
adversary not knowing the key, these output bits look like independent uniformly-drawn
random bits. Such a PRF is a powerful primitive that can readily be used as a message
authentication codes (MAC), a stream cipher or a key derivation function. With some
very simple modes, one can turn it into an authenticated encryption scheme and even a
block cipher supporting variable block length.
In more details, Farfalle builds a PRF from a b-bit cryptographic permutation, or a family
2
of permutations possibly with different numbers of rounds. The constructed PRF takes as
input a key and a sequence of arbitrary-length data strings, and it generates an arbitrary-
length output. It consists of a mask derivation, a compression layer and an expansion layer,
each of them involving the parallel application of a permutation. The compression layer
applies one of the permutations to input blocks, each blinded with a rolling b-bit input
mask, and it (bitwise) adds their outputs in a b-bit accumulator. For the expansion layer,
the accumulator is subject to a permutation and then used as a rolling state to generate the
output. Each output block is the sum of the output mask and the result of a permutation
applied to the rolling state.
We depict the compression and expansion stages of Farfalle in Figure 1. The construction
aims for simplicity and efﬁciency and has some features in common with the sponge
construction [8]. As in sponges, the inverse of the permutation is not used. Another inter-
esting feature it has in common with sponges is the ability to compute it for incremental
inputs. While in sponges this is modeled by the duplex construction [ 10], in Farfalle
this is achieved by the fact that the contribution of input strings to the accumulator only
depends on their value and position in the input.
Farfalle can be seen as a parallelizable counterpart of the sponge for keyed applications.
In particular, its permutation calls can be performed in parallel as soon as the input masks
have been generated. This can be exploited on many platforms, including on modern
processors with single-instruction multiple-data (SIMD) units. Moreover, it can be made
very efﬁcient as the number of rounds in the permutations can be taken much smaller
than in sponge-based modes, thanks to the fact that in Farfalle an adversary never has
access to both the input and the output of a permutation call.
Thanks to its input-output characteristics, Farfalle is really versatile. We specify concrete
modes on top of it for authentication, encryption and authenticated encryption, as well as
a wide block cipher mode.
Farfalle can be instantiated with any cryptographic permutation. In particular, we in-
stantiate it with the KECCAK -p permutations and with a rolling function similar to those
proposed in [29], attach concrete security claims to it and call the result KRAVATTE. Refer-
ence and optimized code for KRAVATTE is available in KECCAK TOOLS and in the KECCAK
code package, respectively [13, 17].
1.1 Overview of the paper
After introducing our notation and the main components of Farfalle in Section 2, we
specify the Farfalle construction in Section 3. In Section 4 we deﬁne (authenticated)
encryption modes: a session-supporting mode for authenticated encryption (AE), a
synthetic initial value (SIV) AE mode and a wide block cipher. Section 5 gives a rationale
for the basic construction and Section 6 discusses some prior art for Farfalle and its
modes. In Section 7 we specify KRAVATTE, a concrete instance of Farfalle making use
of KECCAK -p, the permutation underlying KECCAK , make a security claim and provide
some rationale. Finally, Section 8 is dedicated to an analysis of linear rolling functions
that can be used in conjunction with any permutation with low algebraic degree.
2 Notation and components
In this section we introduce notation related to strings and the two types of functions
used in Farfalle: permutations and rolling functions.
3
2.1 Strings
Farfalle operates on strings of bits, that we will just call strings in the following. Inside
Farfalle, strings are processed in chunks of b bits, where b is the width of the underlying
permutations. We use uppercase characters for arbitrary-length strings and lowercase
characters for b-bit strings.
We denote the length of a string X by |X|. The set of strings of length n is Zn
2 and the set
of strings of any length is Z∗
2.
When applied to strings, the + operator is the bitwise addition, a.k.a. modulo 2 addition
or exclusive-or (XOR). The ||operator is the concatenation.
Converting an input string to an array of b-bit strings requires a padding rule. We use
simple padding that appends a single 1-bit followed by the minimum number of 0-bits
resulting in a string with a length that is a multiple of b. We write P = pad10∗(M). The
string P can be seen as an array of b-bit blocks pi. It is convenient to have index i start
from a value of our choice I. We denote this as P = pI, pI+1 . . . pI+n−1, with n denoting
the number of n-bit blocks in P.
A sequence of m strings M(0) to M(m−1) is denoted M(m−1) ◦···◦ M(1) ◦M(0). The
notation deliberately reminds of the composition of functions. The set of all sequences of
at least one string is (Z∗
2 )+.
Farfalle yields a PRF that returns a string of arbitrary output length. In our notation, we
let the length of this string be determined by the context. In particular, X + FK (M) means
that the required output length of FK (M) is |X|. In some cases it is convenient to skip the
ﬁrst q bits of the output. For this we use the notation X + FK (M) ≪q to indicate that we
take the output starting from offset q, i.e., the bits q to q + |X|−1 of the output produced
by FK (M).
2.2 Permutations
Farfalle makes use of four cryptographic permutations, each operating on b-bit strings:
pb for deriving the initial mask from the key K
pc in the compression layer
pd between the compression and expansion layer
pe in the expansion layer
Speciﬁc security requirements apply for each of them, see Section 5. It is however not a
security requirement that they are different. One may specify instances of Farfalle where
the four permutations are the same. We think the way to instantiate the most efﬁcient
Farfalle instances is by taking a permutation with a variable number of rounds and tuning
the rounds for the four different cases to optimize the ratio efﬁciency vs. safety margin.
2.3 Rolling functions
A rolling function, denoted as roll, is a permutation of Zb
2. Farfalle makes use of two rolling
functions, each operating on b-bit strings:
rollc for generating masks that are added to the input blocks in the compression layer
4
rolle to update the internal state during expansion
We write roll(k) for the result after applying the rolling function once and rolli(k) for the
result after applying it i times.
Typically,rollc is a lightweight linear function with huge order, like updating functions of
linear feedback shift registers. The main security requirement is the following. Informally,
an adversary not knowing k shall not be able to predict the mask valuerolli
c(k) for any i in
a reasonable range nor the difference between any pair of mask values rolli
c(k) +rollj
c(k)
for any i ̸= j in that range. The combination with permutations of low algebraic degree
introduces an additional security requirement: the set {rolli
c(k)|0 ≤i < n}shall not
contain high-dimensional afﬁne spaces for n a reasonable value (see Section 8.1).
The requirements for the rolling function rolle depend on the algebraic degree of pe. If
the algebraic degree is relatively high, a function that qualiﬁes as rollc also qualiﬁes as
rolle. However, if pe has a relatively low algebraic degree, rolle must be non-linear due to
the existence of certain attacks (see Section 5.3 for a more in-depth discussion). Naturally,
rolle should have a negligible amount of states in short cycles (preferably none) as they
would lead to periodic output sequences. The absence of high-dimensional afﬁne spaces
remains a requirement, but for a non-linear rolling function it is very unlikely that these
exist.
Finally, with the eye on parallelizability, we wish the computation of bothrollc and rolle
to be lightweight and allow the computation of several iterations simultaneously.
3 Speciﬁcation of Farfalle
We deﬁne Farfalle, a PRF construction that takes as input a variable-length secret key K
and a data string sequence, and returns an extract of the output stream at a desired offset
and for a desired length. It makes use of four permutations and two rolling functions.
Informally, Farfalle consists of three parts. First, the key derivation computes a b-bit mask
k from the key K. Then, the compression layer computes a b-bit accumulator from the
data string sequence using the mask k. And ﬁnally, the expansion layer computes a b-bit
rolling state from the accumulator and then generates the output from the rolling state and
a mask derived from k. We provide the deﬁnition in Algorithm 1 and an illustration in
Figure 1.
The compression layer applies a permutation pc to b-bit blocks, each the sum of a data
block and a rolling maskrolli
c(k) with i the index of the block in the sequence and (bitwise)
adds them into the accumulator x. It enjoys a rather powerful incremental property. The
block index i only depends on the length and number of input blocks accumulated already.
Clearly, if multiple Farfalle computations share the same data block x with the same block
index, their contribution to the accumulator is the same and pc(x + rolli
c(k)) needs to be
computed only once. A special case of this is Farfalle applied to multiple string sequences
with a common preﬁx and the same initial mask k.
Note that to separate input strings, the value of the index for the ﬁrst block of M(j) is 2
higher than that for the last block of M(j−1). There is hence a block index value for which
there is no contribution to the accumulator. We call this a blank index, a concept elucidated
in Figure 2.
While the application of the rolling function in the compression layer of Farfalle is essen-
tially serial, the application of pc for index i can be done as soon as the input block has
5
pc
c
m0
k
pc
c
m1
k
…
pc
i c
mi
k
pe
e
z0
k′
pe
e
z1
k′
…
pej
e
zj
k′
K∥10 pb
i+2
c
pd
Figure 1: The Farfalle construction.
Algorithm 1 Deﬁnition of Farfalle[pb, pc, pd, pe, rollc, rolle]
Parameters: b-bit permutations pb, pc, pd andpe and rolling functions rollcand rolle.
Input:
key K ∈Z∗
2, |K|≤ b −1
input string sequence M(m−1) ◦···◦ M(0) ∈(Z∗
2 )+
requested length n ∈N and offset q ∈N
Output: string Z ∈Zn
2
K′= pad10∗(K)
k ←pb(K′) {mask derivation}
x ←0b
I ←0
for j running from 0 to m −1 do
M = pad10∗(M(j))
Split M in b-bit blocks mI to mI+µ−1
x ←x + ∑
I+µ−1
i=I pc(mi + rolli
c(k))
I ←I + µ + 1 {skip the blank index}
k′←rollI
c(k)
y ←pd(x)
while all the requested n bits are not yet produced do
produce b-bit blocks as zj = pe(rollj
e(y)) +k′
Z ←n successive bits from concatenation of z0||z1||z2 . . . starting from bit with index q.
return Z = 0n + FK
(
M(m−1) ◦···◦ M(0)
)
≪q
6
pc
0 c k
pc
1 c k
pc
2 c k
3 c kblank index
pc
4 c k
pc
5 c k
6 c kblank index
K∥10 pb
k′ …7 c
a0
a1
a2
b0
b1
A
10
B
10
…
Figure 2: A closer look at the compression of example string sequence B ◦A in Farfalle.
been formed and rolli
c(k) is available. Hence if rollc is relatively lightweight, the main
part of the computation, namely the evaluations of pc, can be done in parallel.
The compression and expansion layers of Farfalle require a secret mask k of exactly b
bits. We wish to accommodate variable-length keys and for that purpose we generate the
initial mask k by applying pb to the padded user key K.
The expansion layer computes the rolling state y from the accumulator x simply by
applying a permutation pd and uses the rolling state in a stream generator. For an output
block with index j, it applies a permutation pe to the rolling state rollj
e(y) and (bitwise)
adds the mask k′to the result before presenting it at the output.
4 Modes of use
Farfalle can be readily used for MAC computation, key derivation and keystream genera-
tion. It allows amortizing the computation of k among different computations with the
same key K.
We now deﬁne three (authenticated) encryption modes on top of Farfalle.
These modes are parameterized by tag length t and/or an alignment unit length ℓ to
prevent shifting buffers by small amounts (bit or bytes). We assume that for any given
key the parameter values are ﬁxed. If there are instances of any of these modes with
different parameters or different modes altogether, we assume their keys have been chosen
7
independently. In other words, we claim no security for different mode instances with the
same key or with different modes with the same key.
4.1 Session-supporting authenticated encryption scheme
In many use cases where one wishes conﬁdentiality, authentication is required too and it
makes sense to offer a scheme that provides both: an authenticated encryption scheme.
Doing this with a PRF is simple: one enciphers the plaintext by adding to it the output of
a PRF applied to a nonce and computes a tag on the ciphertext (and possibly metadata).
Often, one does not only want to protect a single message, but rather a session where
multiple messages are exchanged, such as in the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol
[27] or the Secure Shell (SSH) protocol [52]. Examples of session-supporting authenticated
encryption schemes are the CAESAR submissions KEYAK [15] and KETJE [14]. They
require only a nonce at the startup of the session and each tag authenticates all messages
already sent in the session.
We deﬁne a session-supportingauthenticated encryption scheme similar to the Motorist mode
deﬁned in [15]. The session keeps track of a history that is presented to an (incrementable)
PRF for generating tags and keystream. Starting a session initializes the history to a nonce
N. From then on, it supports messages consisting of metadata A and/or plaintext P. The
wrapping of a message consists of three phases. First, Farfalle-SAE adds to the plaintext,
if non-empty, the output of the incremental PRF applied to the history in order to generate
the ciphertext. Second, it appends the metadata and/or ciphertext to the history. Finally,
it generates the tag by applying the PRF to the history. Note that a tag authenticates the
complete history of the session. Unwrapping is similar.
Farfalle-SAE has two parameters: the tag length t and an alignment unit length ℓ. It
reserves the ﬁrst t bits of the PRF output for tags and takes keystream from the PRF
output stream from an offset that is the smallest multiple ofℓ not shorter than t. Moreover,
Farfalle-SAE applies domain separation between metadata and ciphertext strings in
the history to skip the ﬁrst phase for plaintext-only messages or the second phase for
metadata-only or even empty messages. We provide a formal speciﬁcation in Algorithm 2.
Clearly, this mode requires the PRF to have the incremental property. When instantiated
with Farfalle, the mask derivation must be done only once and in every call to Farfalle only
the recently appended string must be compressed. Like in Motorist [15], the initialization
returns a tag that can be sent along with the nonce (sender) or veriﬁed at the beginning of
a session (receiver).
4.2 SIV authenticated encryption scheme
Farfalle-SAE, as well as Motorist, requires the management of nonces: each session shall
be started with a unique combination of key and nonce. Nonce management is perceived
as a difﬁcult task by some, and for that audience we deﬁne a so-called synthetic initial
value (SIV) authenticated encryption scheme [51, 38]. SIV authenticated encryption schemes
have the feature that one can securely encipher different plaintexts with the same key
without requiring the overhead of nonce management. It simply uses the tag computed
over the message as a nonce for the encryption function and security only breaks down
when two messages have the same tag. SIV modes were originally proposed for key
transport, but system architects that are not sure about their ability to manage nonces
now also propose it for other use cases. An example is the mode GCM-SIV [32] that was
8
Algorithm 2 Deﬁnition of Farfalle-SAE[F, t, ℓ]
Parameters: PRF F, tag length t ∈N and alignment unit length ℓ ∈N
Initialization taking key K ∈Z∗
2 and nonce N ∈Z∗
2, and returning tag T ∈Zt
2
offset = ℓ
⌈t
ℓ
⌉
: the smallest multiple of ℓ not smaller than t
history ←N
T ←0t + FK (history)
return T
Wrap taking metadata A ∈Z∗
2 and plaintext P ∈Z∗
2, and returning ciphertext C ∈Z|P|
2
and tag T ∈Zt
2
C ←P + FK (history) ≪offset
if |A|> 0 OR |P|= 0 then
history ←A||0 ◦history
if |P|> 0 then
history ←C||1 ◦history
T ←0t + FK (history)
return C, T
Unwrap taking metadata A ∈Z∗
2, ciphertext C ∈Z∗
2 and tag T ∈Zt
2, and returning
plaintext P ∈Z|C|
2 or an error
P ←C + FK (history) ≪offset
if |A|> 0 OR |C|= 0 then
history ←A||0 ◦history
if |C|> 0 then
history ←C||1 ◦history
T′←0t + FK (history)
if T′= T then
return P
else
return error!
9
proposed to the Internet Research Task Force (IRTF) and the Crypto Forum Research
Group (CFRG) as speciﬁed in a RFC [31].
Farfalle-SIV takes as input a secret key K, an arbitrary-length plaintext P and arbitrary-
length metadata A and returns a ciphertext C with the same length as the plaintext and a
ﬁxed-length tag T. It ﬁrst computes the tag by applying a PRF to P ◦A and enciphers P
by adding to it the output of the PRF applied to T ◦A. We provide a formal speciﬁcation
in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 Deﬁnition of Farfalle-SIV[F, t]
Parameters: a PRF F and tag length t ∈N
Wrap taking metadata A ∈Z∗
2 and plaintext P ∈Z∗
2, and returning ciphertext C ∈Z|P|
2
and tag T ∈Zt
2
T ←0t + FK (P ◦A)
C ←P + FK (T ◦A)
return C, T
Unwrap taking metadata A ∈Z∗
2, ciphertext C ∈Z∗
2 and tag T ∈Zt
2, and returning
plaintext P ∈Z|C|
2 or an error
P ←C + FK (T ◦A)
T′←0t + FK (P ◦A)
if T′= T then
return P
else
return error!
The security of this mode relies on Farfalle to be a PRF. For conﬁdentiality, it requires that
all messages that are enciphered with the same key and that have the same metadata A
result in a different tag T. Two distinct messages with colliding tags will use the same
keystream to encipher their plaintexts and hence the sum of their ciphertexts will be equal
to the sum of their plaintexts. For a chosen value of the parameter t, the probability of a
tag collision occurring in n messages is upper bounded by n2/2t+1. For example, if in an
application it is reasonable to assume that only 240 messages with the same (or empty)
metadata and the same key will be processed, and one is willing to accept a risk of a
collision up to 2−40, tags of length 128 bits will do the job. For tag collisions between
messages with different metadata A there is no security problem as the keystream also
depends on the metadata A.
When instantiated with Farfalle, the mask derivation and the compression of A that are in
common to both calls to FK () must be done only once, thanks to the incremental property.
4.3 Wide block cipher
There are use cases where it would be practical to have a block cipher with a custom
block size, or where the block size is adaptable to the task at hand and that supports
next to the key an additional diversiﬁcation parameter, called a tweak. Examples include
disk encryption, where the block size would equal the size of sectors. Another example
is encryption in the Tor anonymity network [ 50]. Here every block of data must be
encrypted recursively multiple times in such a way that the cryptogram is not longer than
the plaintext and this joint encryption must achieve a certain authentication. This can be
achieved with a tweakable wide block cipher with a width of 509 bytes.
10
We deﬁne a tweakable wide block cipher based on two PRFs. The global construction is
an instantiation of the HHFHFH mode as presented by Dan Bernstein at the Symmetric
Cryptography Dagstuhl seminar in January 2016 [6], that is in turn based on work of Naor
and Reingold [46], that is based on a paper by Stefan Lucks [42], that builds further on
work of Luby and Rackoff [41].
It takes as input a secret key K, an arbitrary-length plaintext P and an arbitrary-length
tweak W and returns a ciphertext C of same length as the plaintext. It performs a 4-round
Feistel network to the plaintext. The latter is split into a left and a right part, with length
determined by the function split[b, ℓ]. This function takes the block length n and returns
the length of the left part nL, which is a multiple of the given alignment unit length ℓ.
The function G (corresponding to F ◦H in HHFHFH) used in the two middle rounds
must be a PRF and takes as input part of the intermediate result and the tweak. The
function H used in the ﬁrst and last round does not necessarily have to be a PRF but
must be differentially uniform. We provide a formal speciﬁcation of the split function in
Algorithm 4 and of the Feistel network in Algorithm 5. A rationale for the split function is
given at the end of this section.
A (tweakable) wide block cipher can be converted to an authenticated encryption scheme
by applying a very simple mode [34]. The metadata is used as tweak and as encipherment
input one uses the plaintext with some agreed veriﬁable redundancy, such as 8 bytes
equal to zero appended to the end. The cryptogram is the encipherment output. One
can authenticate the cryptogram by verifying that the decipherment output ends in the
agreed ﬁxed string. This veriﬁcation process can be performed before full decipherment
is completed, allowing for early rejection of unauthentic cryptograms. As observed in [3],
in comparison to SIV , a wide block cipher mode has the advantage of smaller overhead
for the same forgery resistance. We provide a formal speciﬁcation in Algorithm 6.
The wide block cipher in principle supports any length. However, the generic security it
can achieve is limited by the ability to generate collisions in the left or right part of the
intermediate result. Such collisions become likely as soon as the number of processed
blocks reaches 2min(nL,nR)/2 ≤2n/4. For this reason, one cannot claim a security level
higher than the width divided by 4 and hence the width cannot be taken too small.
When instantiating H and G with two instances of Farfalle that have the same permutation
for pb, the mask derivation can be pre-computed. Similarly, the compression of the tweak
W can be shared among the computations of GK (R||1 ◦W) and GK (L||0 ◦W).
4.3.1 Rationale for the split function
The function split[b, ℓ] returns a valuenL that minimizes mL + mR, where mL is the number
of b-bit blocks to hold the L string in Algorithm 5 and mR is deﬁned similarly for R. We
further require that L is aligned on ℓ bits, i.e., that nL is a multiple of ℓ. More precisely,
the number of blocks at the left is mL =
⌈
nL+2
b
⌉
, since Algorithm 5 requires appending
one frame bit for domain separation and Farfalle adds one bit of padding. As ℓ ≥2 and
we want that nL|ℓ, these two bits are absorbed in a buffer of at least ℓ bits that ensures
the alignment, and we can equivalently write mL =
⌈
nL+ℓ
b
⌉
. Similarly, the number of
blocks at the right is mR =
⌈
nR+2
b
⌉
. Because of the domain separation bits, padding bits
and buffer for alignment, the total number of blocks mL + mR is at least q as deﬁned in
Algorithm 4. An optimal solution means mL + mR = q.
This function split[b, ℓ] addresses an additional requirement, namely that min(nL, nR) is
11
Algorithm 4 Deﬁnition of split[b, ℓ]
Parameters: permutation width b ∈N and alignment unit length ℓ ∈N, satisfying
ℓ ≥2 and ℓ|b
Input: block length n ∈N
if n ≤2b −(ℓ + 2) then
nL = ℓ
⌊
n+ℓ
2ℓ
⌋
else
q =
⌈
n+ℓ+2
b
⌉
, i.e., q is smallest multiple of b that n + ℓ + 2 ﬁts in
x = ⌊log2(q −1)⌋, i.e., x is largest integer such that 2x < q
nL = (q −2x)b −ℓ
return nL = split(n)
Algorithm 5 Deﬁnition of encryption in Farfalle-WBC[H, G, ℓ]
Parameters: two PRFs H and G and alignment unit length ℓ ∈N
Encipher taking key K ∈Z∗
2, tweak W ∈Z∗
2 and plaintext P ∈Z∗
2 and returning
ciphertext C ∈Z|P|
2
L gets ﬁrst split(|P|) bits of P and R the remaining ones
R0 ←R0 + HK(L||0), with R0 the ﬁrst min(b, |R|) bits of R
L ←L + GK (R||1 ◦W)
R ←R + GK (L||0 ◦W)
L0 ←L0 + HK(R||1), with L0 the ﬁrst min(b, |L|) bits of L
return C ← the concatenation of L and R
Algorithm 6 Deﬁnition of Farfalle-WBC-AE[H, G, t, ℓ]
Parameters: two PRFs H and G, the expansion length t ∈N and alignment unit length
ℓ ∈N
Wrap taking key K ∈Z∗
2, metadata A ∈Z∗
2 and plaintext P ∈Z∗
2, and returning
ciphertext C ∈Z|P|+t
2
P′←P||0t
return C ←Encipher(K, A, P′)
Unwrap taking key K ∈Z∗
2, metadata A ∈Z∗
2 and ciphertext C ∈Z∗
2, and returning
plaintext P ∈Z|C|−t
2 or an error
L gets ﬁrst split(|C|) bits of C and R the remaining ones
L0 ←L0 + HK(R||1), with L0 the ﬁrst min(b, |L|) bits of L
R ←R + GK (L||0 ◦A)
if |R|≥ b + t then
if the last t bits of R ̸= 0t then return error!
L ←L + GK (R||1 ◦A)
R0 ←R0 + HK(L||0), with R0 the ﬁrst b bits of R
else
L ←L + GK (R||1 ◦A)
R0 ←R0 + HK(L||0), with R0 the ﬁrst min(b, |R|) bits of R
if the last t bits of L||R ̸= 0t then return error!
P′←L||R
return P ←the ﬁrst |C|−t bits of P′
12
not too small, to take into account the difference uniformity of HK with output truncated
to nL or nR bits. The function split distinguishes between two cases.
• For n ≤ 2b −(ℓ + 2), we have mL = mR = 1. The function split maximizes
min(nL, nR) within the constraint that nL is a multiple of ℓ. More precisely, it is easy
to show that |nL −nR|≤ℓ.
• For n > 2b −(ℓ+2), we ﬁrst translate the requirement on the lengths tomin(nL, nR) ≥
b −ℓ. Algorithm 4 realizes this by taking nL = mLb −ℓ ≥b −ℓ for some number
of blocks mL ≥1 on the left side. For the right side, we have q ≥3, so that mR ≥2
and nR ≥b −1. Second, nL is a multiple of ℓ bits since b is a multiple of ℓ. Then, we
reach optimality since nR = n −(mLb −ℓ) and thus mR =
⌈
nR+2
b
⌉
= q −mL. (Note
that this works independently of the choice of mL.) Finally, the function splits these
q blocks into the largest power of two for R. As the parallelism degree is often a
power of two, this enables its optimal exploitation.
5 Rationale for Farfalle
A Farfalle function loaded with a secret key K can be distinguished from a random
function in several ways. We list here the types of attack that have played an important
role in shaping Farfalle and that impose criteria on the used permutations and rolling
functions:
1. accumulator collision: ﬁnding two input strings leading to identical accumulators;
2. weaknesses in the mask derivation;
3. distinguishing the output for a single input from a random string
•retrieving rolling state and mask using algebraic attacks
•detecting bias in the output sequence using higher-order differentials
•detecting bias in the output sequence using correlation propagation
4. distinguishing the output for multiple inputs from random strings;
5. ﬁnding the values of y and k from input-output pairs.
We discuss these attacks in the following subsections.
5.1 Accumulator collision
Recall that the accumulator is the value x that sums the contributions of pc(mi + rolli
c(k)).
Finding two string sequences M and M′leading to the same value of the accumulator
can be used to attack Farfalle. The difﬁculty of ﬁnding collisions in the accumulator is
based on the differential propagation properties of pc and is helped by the fact that before
being subject to pc, each input blocks mi is whitened with the rolling input mask rolli
c(k)
and that the accumulator cannot be directly observed. One may attempt to generate such
collisions in several ways. We describe them in this subsection.
13
5.1.1 Sets of input blocks that contribute 0 to the accumulator
The simplest method, at least conceptually, is to form M′by appending a block at the end
of M and hope its b-bit contribution to the accumulator is zero. Succeeding in doing this
is equivalent to successfully guessing k.
One may try to append two blocks where the input to the permutation is equal: mi +
rolli
c(k) =mi+1 + rolli+1
c (k). The ability of the adversary to do this critically relies on her
ability to predict rolli
c(k) +rolli+1
c (k), imposing the requirement for the rolling function
that it shall be hard to predict k + roll(k) for unknown k. This attack can be generalized
by not only appending blocks to M, but also putting input blocks in M′where there are
blank indices in M. Then it shall be hard to predict k + rollδ
c(k) for unknown k and any
offset δ in a reasonable range.
Appending multiple blocks and saying something meaningful on their joint contribution
to the accumulator is possible if the permutation has sufﬁciently low algebraic degree
and the rolling function allows predicting mask differences. Basically, if one chooses the
input blocks such that the corresponding inputs to pc form an afﬁne space of sufﬁcient
dimension, their joint contribution is zero. We refer to Section 8.1 for more explanation.
This imposes a requirement on the rolling function that a sequence of masks with reason-
able index values shall not contain an afﬁne space of dimension higher than the algebraic
degree of the permutation.
5.1.2 Input block variants swapping pc inputs
One may try to construct M′ from M by modifying two input blocks mi and mj into
m′
i and m′
j, such that the input to pc for mi equals that of m′
j and vice versa. This will
just swap the contribution of blocks i and j to the accumulator. As the addition is
commutative, the joint contribution is the same in both cases. This boils down to ﬁnding
mi + rolli(k) = m′
j + rollj(k) and a similar expression for mj and m′
i. The ability of the
adversary to come up with such input blocks again critically depends on her ability to
predict k + rollδ(k) for unknown k and any offset δ in a reasonable range.
5.1.3 High-probability diﬀerentials in pc
Another approach exploits high-probability differentials in pc. One applies two different
inputs M and M′that have the same length but differ in a limited number of blocks,
denoted as active. Due to the invertibility of pc, the smallest number of active blocks that
may lead to a collision is 2. Let the difference in the ﬁrst block be ∆ and that in the second
block ∆′. We have a collision if these differences propagate to the same difference through
the permutation. Assuming the adversary does not know the mask values for the active
blocks, the probability of a collision is
Pr(collision) =∑
γ
DP(∆, γ)DP(∆′, γ) , (1)
with DP(x, y) the differential probability of differential (x, y) over pc. The differential
probabilities DP(∆, γ) for ﬁxed ∆ and varying γ can be seen as a vector with 2b compo-
nents, all positive and summing to 1. Equation (1) can be seen as an inner product of such
vectors. From this it follows that the highest values can be obtained by taking ∆ = ∆′,
14
yielding:
Pr(collision) =∑
γ
DP2(∆, γ) . (2)
This presents a clear criterion for pc.
In the initial rounds an adversary may try to guide the difference propagation by making
assumptions on the masks rolli(k) and rollj(k) and choose the corresponding message
blocks mi and mj to satisfy certain conditions in the propagation. If the number of bits
to be guessed is smaller than the number of conditions to be satisﬁed, this may result in
some gain. This hence presents a criterion for the rolling function.
5.2 Properties of the mask derivation
To derive the mask k, we apply the pb permutation to a variable-size key K after padding
it in a reversible way. This ensures that no collision can happen between different keys,
even with different sizes.
We would like to highlight two properties that we expect from the mask derivation.
• As explained in Section 5.1, the adversary should have no effective way to predict
the value of k + rollδ
c(k) for reasonable values ofδ. Otherwise, she can easily produce
accumulator collisions, e.g., by swapping input blocks.
• Regarding differential attacks, the input to pc, namely, mi + rolli
c(k), should look
sufﬁciently random to an adversary, so as to prevent her from choosing input values
that signiﬁcantly decreases the workload to propagate a difference according to a
differential trail.
To satisfy these properties, we express the requirement on pb that for every matrix M of
rank r, the min-entropy of M ×k is close to the minimum of r and the min-entropy of the
key K. This encompasses the ﬁrst property when rollc is a linear function, our preferred
option as illustrated by KRAVATTE (see Section 7.4.2), by choosingM = I + rollδ
c, with I the
identity matrix. For the second property, when pc employs a degree-two round function
(also our preferred choice), the conditions on the absolute values for the propagation of
differences are linear. Hence, by choosing M accordingly, this requirement ensures that
the difference cannot be propagated with a higher probability than expected.
5.3 Distinguishing the output from a random string (single input)
Clearly, one may have a collision in the sequence of rollj
e(y) values if there is a short cycle
or if different accumulator values x and x′lead to rolling state values y = pd(x) and
y′= pd(x′) such that rollδ
e(y′) =y for some reasonably small value ofδ. As a consequence,
the rolling function rolle must be chosen such that the states are in very long cycles.
Every output block depends on an output mask and a rolling state. Hence, it requires
at least two output blocks to determine the value of the rolling state and/or the output
mask. When performing an algebraic attack using two output blocks, the adversary must
solve a system of equations with unknown variables spread over two full instances of the
permutation pe.
At ﬁrst sight, attempts to improve the situation by using more than two output blocks
would lead to an overdetermined system of equations with even more variables and
due to the application of the rolling function to the rolling state, every additional output
15
block would introduce many additional variables. However, as pointed out by a team of
cryptanalysts who reported to us their attacks [2] on a preliminary version of KRAVATTE,
the following techniques can be applied:
Meet-in-the-middle They express bits of the intermediate state after q rounds of pe as
polynomials of bits of the rolling state rollj
e(y) on the one hand and as polynomials
of the output mask k′on the other, using the knowledge of an output block zj. This
gives rise to a set of polynomial equations with monomials in bits of y and in bits of
k′. The number of monomials in y is limited by the algebraic degree ofq rounds of pe,
and the number of monomials ink′is limited by the algebraic degree ofn −q inverse
rounds of pe. Thanks to the fact that the bits of rollj
e(y) can be expressed linearly as
bits of y, more equations can be obtained without introducing new monomials by
repeating this for many output blocks zj.
Linearization The non-linear equations can be converted to a system of linear equations by
considering the monomials as independent variables (let us call them the monomial
variables) and solving the system of equations using linear algebra.
Elimination of monomials by exploiting linear recurrenceIf rolle is linear, the bits of
rollj
e(y) satisfy a linear recurrence equation. Referring to prior art in the crypt-
analysis of ﬁltered LFSRs, the attackers show that the monomials in rolle satisfy
the same linear recurrence relations and hence so do the monomial variables. This
allows eliminating the monomial variables in rollj
e(y) from the system of linear
equations above, leaving only monomial variables in k′. This dramatically reduces
the complexity of the attack.
Although this requires a substantial amount of output blocks and takes a considerable
effort even for choices of pe that have a relatively small degree, it still may be feasible
with data and computational complexity that would break a reasonable security claim.
One may protect against this attack by adopting a permutation pe with higher algebraic
degree, e.g., by taking more rounds, but this has a negative impact on the efﬁciency of the
expansion phase.
Taking a closer look at the attack techniques, we see that they strongly rely on the linearity
of rolle. First of all, generating more equations for more output blocks does not introduce
new monomials because the bits of rolli
e(y) are linear functions of the bits of y. Second,
the elimination of monomials in y also requires rolle to be linear. This strongly suggests
that using a non-linear rolling function for rolle would provide protection against the
described attacks, without the need to take a higher-degree permutation pe. Moreover,
it is very likely that even a very small amount of non-linearity in rolle is sufﬁcient for
reasonable choices of pe. The attacks described in [ 2] require huge numbers of output
blocks and hence imply many iterations of the rolling function rolle. For this reason, we
recommend adopting a lightweight non-linear rolling function for rolle.
Another method to distinguish the output is to ﬁnd biases in linear combinations (parities)
of output bits using the correlation properties of the permutation. Consider the case where
these bits are spread across two blocks. The output block with index i + j is completely
determined by the output block with index j and the output mask: pe−1(zi+j + k) =
rolli
e(pe−1(zj + k)), or equivalently
zi+j = k +
(
pe ◦rolli
e ◦pe−1
)
(zj + k) .
The sign of the bias in any parity of output bits vTzj + uTzi+j depends on k, but its
16
amplitude is independent of k and equal to the absolute value of
∑
w
Corrpe ◦rolli
e
(u, w)Corrpe (v, w).
If rolle is non-linear, it is likely that the accumulated non-linearity in rolli
e(w) will make
this harder to exploit with increasing i. This comes down to a joint criterion for pe and
rolle.
5.4 Distinguishing the output from a random string (multiple inputs)
We now describe a distinguishing attack that requires2d chosen input strings with d −1
the algebraic degree of pe ◦pd. For a given key K, we compute Farfalle for 2d input strings,
each consisting of d input blocks and one block of padding. Each string has the form
m(λ) =mλ0
0 ||mλ1
1 ||. . .||mλd−1
d−1 , where λ ∈Zd
2 and m0
i ̸= m1
i for all i.
If we denote ri = pc(m0
i + rolli(k)) and r∗
i = pc(m1
i + rolli(k)) and r′
i = ri + r∗
i ̸= 0, then
the value of the accumulator for the input string with label λ is x = ∑i ri + ∑i λir′
i. Over
the space of input strings, this is an afﬁne space. So summing the Farfalle outputs for
these input strings corresponds to taking the d-th derivative of the function applied to the
accumulator. If this function has degree less than d, this sum becomes zero. Hence, we
can use this to distinguish the Farfalle output from a random string. Clearly, this imposes
a criterion on the algebraic degree of pe ◦pd. Note that this works independently from
the algebraic degree of pc and of the concrete values of the blocks m0
i and m1
i .
In [33] Jian Guo and Ling Song published an attack on the Farfalle instance KRAVATTE
that improves upon the one described above. By guessing a number of bits of k′one can
partially peel off the non-linear step of the last round of pe, and thus strongly reduce
the number of inputs. Later, this attack was extended in [2] by partially peeling off two
non-linear layers. These improvements illustrate that one should take some margin in the
choice of pe ◦pd: one should consider the algebraic degree for pe ◦pd taking into account
that it may be possible to peel off some rounds of pe.
5.5 Finding the value of k from input-output pairs
Finally, ﬁnding the value ofk from input-output pairs can be seen as a variant to doing key
retrieval in an Even-Mansour [28] cipher, where the permutation is pe ◦pd ◦pc. Here the
complete spectrum of classical block cipher attacks can be applied. The main differences
are that in Farfalle an adversary has the additional degree of freedom of exploitingrolli
e(y)
to alter the rolling state that forms the intermediate state after pd ◦pc rounds, and that in
most Even-Mansour use cases an adversary can query the inverse cipher, which is not the
case for Farfalle.
A key point for Farfalle is that the marginal cost for processing an input block is executing
pc, for generating an output block is executing pe but that an adversary performing an
attack using input-output pairs must span pe ◦pd ◦pc.
6 Comparison with prior art
We describe the prior art for Farfalle in Section 6.1, for the session-supporting authen-
ticated encryption mode in Section 6.2, for the SIV authenticated encryption mode in
17
Section 6.3 and ﬁnally for the wide block cipher in Section 6.4.
6.1 Farfalle
The Farfalle construction reminds of the keyed sponge construction, with most efﬁcient
version the full-width keyed sponge [9, 1, 45, 22]. It differs in that the keyed sponge is
strictly serial while Farfalle consists of two main layers that are by themselves parallel.
The keyed sponge can be duplexed, i.e., incremental inputs can be processed, with
consequence that the partial input and output to an underlying permutationf are available
to the adversary. Duplexing works in Farfalle too but in a slightly different manner and
never leads to the input and output of a single call to pc, pd or pe being available to
the adversary. This implies that for equal safety margins in Farfalle one can afford to
take permutations with less rounds than in the keyed sponge. Moreover, in the sponge
construction the (squeezing) rate is limited to b −c with c the capacity. As the capacity
determines the security strength, the sponge construction tends to become less efﬁcient
for small permutation widths. In Farfalle, one can plug in much smaller permutations for
the same target security strength. The size is basically limited by the birthday bound on
having collisions in the input to pc or pe.
Farfalle can readily be used for MAC computation, keystream generation, key derivation
and as building blocks in more elaborate schemes. Its computational cost is a single
permutation pb for setting up the key, the single call topd and then one execution of pc per
input block and one execution of pe per output block. We compare to some similar MAC
modes (setting aside the fact that these modes do not support arbitrary-length outputs):
Protected counter sumThis is a method proposed in [4] to build an unpredictable func-
tion with arbitrary-length input from an unpredictable function with ﬁxed-length
input. The Farfalle mode, with its output restricted to a single block, can be seen
as an instantiation of this method. In Farfalle, the unpredictable function with
ﬁxed-length input is implemented with a permutation, where the rolling function
(implicitly) codes the block index. The permutations pd and pe and the whitening
of the output with a mask take the place of the ﬁnal call of the unpredictable func-
tion in the protected counter sum. Farfalle has several key ideas in common with
protected counter sums, but there are also some differences. The most important
differences are that Farfalle has an arbitrarily extendable output and that Farfalle has
the ambition to be unpredictable (in the terminology of [4]) even if the underlying
building blocks are not unpredictable as such.
PMAC This is a block cipher mode for MAC computation proposed in [18] and a variant
of protected counter sum. The random function is instantiated by a block cipher
and it has a speciﬁc coding for the counter block in the inputs. The compression
layer of Farfalle is similar to PMAC as it performs the block cipher calls in parallel
and (bitwise) adds their outputs. In PMAC the input blocks are b bits and before
applying the block cipher, their value is offset by a rolled version (with rolling
function based on a Gray code) of a b-bit secret k derived from the user key K with
a block cipher call. The tag is obtained by offsetting the accumulator with a rolled
version of k and applying the block cipher to the result.
Alred This was one of the ﬁrst permutation-based modes proposed for MAC computation
in [24, 26] and is mostly known for the instance Pelican-MAC based on AES [ 25].
The main difference with Farfalle is that it is strictly serial and can therefore not
take advantage of available parallelism (e.g., pipelining in the AES-NI instructions)
in resources. On the other hand, it shares with Farfalle that never an input and
output to a permutation f is available and uses that to reduce the number of rounds
18
in f drastically compared to more generic modes such as CBC-MAC or C-MAC.
Moreover, the output length of Alred is limited to the width of the underlying block
cipher and it does not support multiple input strings.
MARVIN This is a mode for MAC computation proposed in [36, 35] that was inspired
at the same time by Alred and by PMAC and uses both a block cipher and a
permutation. The compression layer of Farfalle is similar to that of MARVIN that
applies a permutation to the input blocks in parallel and (bitwise) adds their outputs
in an accumulator. The input blocks to the permutation calls are formed in a way
similar to PMAC, but here a variant of Hugo Krawczyk’s cryptographic CRC [37] is
used for rolling. In MARVIN, all input blocks pass through the permutation before
being added into the accumulator. Moreover, the tag is obtained by applying the
block cipher to the accumulator offset with the secret k and some constants coding
message and tag lengths.
We can also compare to some stream cipher modes (setting aside the fact that these modes
do not support arbitrary-length inputs):
Counter mode of a block cipherIn counter mode, a priori no distinction is made be-
tween the long-term nonce and the short-term block index. Depending on the
size of the nonce, an adversary can apply differences of large choice and observe
corresponding outputs.
Mode underlying Salsa and ChaChaThese stream ciphers proposed in [ 5] can be con-
sidered as a mode on top of a permutation. This is very close to counter mode of a
block cipher, where the block cipher is rather of type Even-Mansour. The adversary
can partially choose the input of the expanding permutation while in Farfalle the
chosen input ﬁrst passes through pc and pd.
Finally, we can compare to the pseudorandom function HS1 that is used in the CAE-
SAR submission HS1-SIV [38]. This pseudorandom function uses two strongly different
functions for compression and for expansion: a differentially uniform hash function for
compression and ChaCha (in a non-standard mode) for expansion. The expansion part is
purely parallel but the compression part has only limited parallelizability. Farfalle has the
advantages that it can be constructed with a single cryptographic permutation and that it
takes sequences of input strings rather than a single one, simplifying the modes built on
top of it.
6.2 Session-based authenticated encryption mode
For Farfalle-SAE a comparison with duplex-based session-supporting authenticated en-
cryption seems appropriate. The most recent mode realizing this is the Motorist mode
underlying KEYAK [15]. Functionally, Farfalle-SAE and Motorist are almost the same. The
difference is in the way this is realized. Motorist supports parallelism but it is limited and
must be determined or negotiated at session setup. Farfalle-SAE on the other hand is fully
parallel for each metadata A or plaintext P.
When considering protection against differential power analysis (DPA) or differential
electromagnetic analysis (DEMA), Motorist offers a high level of leakage resilience. Its
key is only applied at session setup. From that point on, the state evolves and its value
depends on all input received. If nonce uniqueness is respected, state values for different
sessions will be completely decorrelated and a DPA/DEMA attack can only be applied to
the session setup phase. The consequence is that DPA countermeasures such as masking
must only be applied during that phase. The same level of protection at the mode level
19
cannot be achieved with Farfalle-SAE but, in the conclusions, we sketch how a Farfalle
variant could be built that would achieve similar protection.
6.3 SIV authenticated encryption mode
Our mode Farfalle-SIV is a close variant of the SIV construction [51]. The SIV construction
was proposed mostly for the purpose of key wrapping and that was later adopted in the
CAESAR submission HS1-SIV [38] for authenticated encryption. The main advantage of
Farfalle-SIV in comparison to these two examples is the following. In the original SIV
construction, the input consists of only metadata A and plaintext P. These are subject to
a ﬁrst keyed PRF that results in a tag (called IV) that serves as input to a second keyed
PRF for generating the keystream. In case the two inputs have colliding tags, the same
keystream is used to encipher two different plaintexts. In HS1-SIV this is addressed by
having an additional nonce that is input to both PRFs and having a tag collision is only
problematic if also the same nonce is used for both messages.
In contrast, Farfalle-SIV has no dedicated nonce, but the metadata A are input in both
PRFs. So now there is only a problem if there is a tag collision and if the two message
have the same metadata A. Thanks to the incremental property of Farfalle, the only cost
this incurs is the caching of the contribution of the metadata to the accumulator.
6.4 Wide block cipher
The novelty of Farfalle-WBC with respect to HHFHFH [6] is that thanks to the incremental
property of Farfalle, the compression of the tweak must be done only once.
Another tweakable wide block cipher construction is AEZ-Core proposed in the CAESAR
submission AEZ [34]. It is not easy to compare Farfalle-WBC with AEZ-Core, as the former
is based on permutations and the latter on tweakable block ciphers. Although it is hard to
measure simplicity, we feel that Farfalle-WBC is a signiﬁcantly simpler construction than
AEZ-Core.
7 Kravatte: Farfalle based on Keccak-p
In this section, we present a Farfalle instance based on KECCAK -p, the permutation
underlying KECCAK , KEYAK and KETJE and standardized in FIPS 202 [12, 14, 15, 49].
Deﬁnition 1. KRAVATTE is Farfalle[pb, pc, pd, pe, rollc, rolle] with the following parame-
ters:
• pb = pc = pd = pe = KECCAK -p[1600, nr = 6],
• rollc as speciﬁed below, and
• rolle as speciﬁed below.
The rolling function rollc applies a linear transformation to the ﬁve lanes of the plane
y = 4 of the KECCAK -p state and leaves the other 20 lanes unchanged. If we denote the
ﬁve lanes before the transformation by (x0, x1, x2, x3, x4) then the transformation maps
them to (x1, x2, x3, x4, x5) with
x5 = (x0 ≪7) +x1 + (x1 ≫3) ,
20
where ≪denotes a cyclic shift (or rotation) to the left and ≫a shift to the right.
The rolling function rolle applies a non-linear transformation to the ten lanes of the planes
y = 4 and y = 3 of the KECCAK -p state and leaves the other 15 lanes unchanged. If we
denote the ten lanes before the transformation by (x0, x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6, x7, x8, x9) then
the transformation maps them to (x1, x2, x3, x4, x5, x6, x7, x8, x9, x10) with
x10 = (x0 ≪7) + (x1 ≪18) +x2 ·(x1 ≫1) ,
where “·” denotes bitwise multiplication in GF(2).
In the standard KECCAK -p notation, with arithmetic on z taken modulo 64, rollc can be
expressed as follows:
a[x][4] ←a[x + 1][4] ∀x ̸= 4
a[4][4][z] ←a[0][4][z −7] +a[1][4][z] +a[1][4][z + 3] ∀z ≤60
a[4][4][z] ←a[0][4][z −7] +a[1][4][z] ∀z > 60
Similarly, rolle can be expressed as follows:
a[x][3] ←a[x + 1][3] ∀x ̸= 4
a[4][3] ←a[0][4]
a[x][4] ←a[x + 1][4] ∀x ̸= 4
a[4][4][z] ←a[0][3][z −7] +a[1][3][z −18] +a[2][3][z] a[1][3][z + 1] ∀z ≤62
a[4][4][z] ←a[0][3][z −7] +a[1][3][z −18] z = 63
7.1 Security claim
We make the following security claim on KRAVATTE.
Claim 1. Let K = (K0, . . ., Ku−1) be an array of u secret keys, each uniformly and independently
chosen from Zκ
2 with κ ≤320. Then, the advantage of distinguishing the array of functions
KRAVATTEKi (·) with i ∈Zu from an array of random oracles RO(i, ·), is at most
uN + (u
2)
2κ + N
2256 + M
2137 +
√uN′
2κ/2−1 + N′
2127 . (3)
Here,
• N is the computational complexity expressed in the (computationally equivalent) number
of executions of KECCAK -p[1600, nr = 6],
• N′is the quantum computational complexity expressed in the (equivalent) number of
quantum oracle accesses to KECCAK -p[1600, nr = 6], and
• M is the online or data complexity expressed in the total number of input and output
blocks processed by KRAVATTEKi (·).
In (3), the ﬁrst term accounts for the effort to ﬁnd one of the u secret keys by exhaustive
search, and for the probability that two keys are equal. The second term expresses that the
complexity of recovering the accumulator or any rolling state inside KRAVATTE must be
as hard as recovering 256 secret bits. The third term expresses the effort to ﬁnd a collision
21
in the accumulator. The number 137 in the denominator follows the lower bound on
differential trails inside KECCAK -p as detailed in Section 7.4.1.
The fourth and ﬁfth terms only apply if the adversary has access to a quantum computer.
The fourth term accounts for a quantum search (or quantum ampliﬁcation algorithm) to
ﬁnd a κ-bit key among u possibilities [30, 20]. The probability of success after N′iterations
is sin2 ((2N′+ 1) θ) with θ = arcsin
√
u/2κ. We upper bound this as 2N′√
u/2κ. The ﬁfth
term similarly accounts for a quantum search over 256 secret bits.
Note that we assume that KRAVATTE is implemented on a classical computer. In other
words, we do not make claims w.r.t. adversaries who would make quantum superposi-
tions of queries to the device implementing KRAVATTE and holding its secret key(s).
We limit ourselves to ﬁxed-length keys that are chosen uniformly and independently to
keep our claim simple. As the rolling function rollc operates on 320 bits of the state, its
support, and leaves the remaining 1280 bits invariant, one could craft a distribution of K
such that k always has a particular key-independent value in the support of rollc. This
would allow switching blocks as the difference between the masks of two different blocks,
k + rollδ
c(k), is known for any δ. Despite the fact that this key distribution would be fairly
artiﬁcial and involves the deﬁnition of pb−1, it is non-trivial to express a security claim
that would only exclude pathological cases like the described example. So although we
expect the construction to be secure for nonuniformly chosen and variable-length keys
too, we restrict the claim to randomly drawn keys.
In the multi-user setting, we require the keys to be independently drawn. If an adversary
can manipulate K, such as in so-called unique keys that consist of a long-term key with a
counter appended, we recommend hashing the key and the counter with a proper hash
function such as KANGAROO TWELVE [16].
7.2 Kravatte-SIV and -SAE
Functions and schemes based on KRAVATTE follow the same naming conventions as for
Farfalle and adopt speciﬁc values for the parameters. In particular:
• KRAVATTE-SIV has t = 256,
• KRAVATTE-SAE has t = 128 and ℓ = 8.
7.3 Kravatte-WBC and -WBC-AE
The wide block cipher and the authenticated encryption scheme based on it make use
of two Farfalle instances: one for H and one for G. In KRAVATTE-WBC, the latter is
instantiated with KRAVATTE and the former is a variant of KRAVATTE that we call SHORT -
KRAVATTE. SHORT -KRAVATTE has the same parameters as KRAVATTE, with the sole
exception of pd that is the identity function instead of KECCAK -p[1600, nr = 4]. In addi-
tion, we set the following parameters:
• KRAVATTE-WBC has ℓ = 8,
• KRAVATTE-WBC-AE has t = 128 and ℓ = 8.
Making joint use of KRAVATTE and SHORT -KRAVATTE is not something we support in
general, as it is speciﬁc to the deﬁnition of KRAVATTE-WBC. We make a dedicated security
claim on KRAVATTE-WBC.
22
Claim 2. Let K = (K0, . . ., Ku−1) be an array of u secret keys, each uniformly and independently
chosen from Zκ
2 with κ ≤320 and let PKi (·) with i ∈Zu be instances of KRAVATTE-WBC. Each
of these instances support two interfaces:
Encipherment denoted as C = PKi (W, P) taking as input a tweak and a plaintext and returning
a cryptogram;
Decipherment denoted as P = PKi
−1(W, C) taking as input a tweak and a cryptogram and
returning a plaintext.
We express as Advsprp the probability of distinguishing PKi (W, ·) from an array of uniformly and
independently drawn random permutations πi,W,n indexed by the key index i, the value of W and
the length n = |P|= |C|, where the adversary can query the inverse permutations.
Let nmin be the minimum length n among all the queries. When nmin ≥512 bits, Advsprp is
claimed to be upper bounded by
(3) + M2
2nmin/2−4 . (4)
Here, N, N′and M are as in Claim 1, except that M also counts the number of input and output
blocks processed by SHORT -KRAVATTE.
The terms in (4) are those of Claim 1 and an additional term. This additional term covers
the case of an adversary attempting a collision in one of the branches of the Feistel
network. For small values of nmin, we believe there are no better attacks than generic ones.
In particular, when n < 3184, the size of either branch is at least n−ℓ
2 bits, thanks to the
deﬁnition of split[b, ℓ] function, and this explains the additional term. We do not explicitly
care about the case nmin ≥3184, as this additional term becomes negligible compared to
the term in M in (3).
7.4 Rationale for the design choices
7.4.1 The number of rounds in pc
The choice of taking 6 rounds for pc is motivated by the difﬁculty of generating collisions
in the accumulator. Our investigations of differential propagation in KECCAK -p provide
evidence that differentials with high DP over a small number of rounds are dominated
by a single trail [ 12, 11]. For our reasoning in this paragraph, we explicitly assume
that this is the case for all differentials with relatively high DP over 5 and 6 rounds of
KECCAK -p. Hence, for any such differential (∆, γ) there exists one trail Q from ∆ to γ
with DP(∆, γ) ≈DP(Q) =2−w(Q). We will denote such a dominant trail by Q(∆, γ).
Using our assumption, we can substitute the differentials in Equation (2) in Section 5.1 by
trails, yielding:
Pr(collision) ≈∑
γ
DP2(Q(∆, γ)) =∑
γ
2−2w(Q(∆,γ)) .
In iterated primitives with a round function of degree 2 such as KECCAK -p, the DP of a
round differential (or equivalently, its weight) only depends in the difference pattern at
the input of a round. Let us apply this to our 6-round trails Q(∆, γ):
Q = ∆
χ◦π◦ρ◦θ
−→ q1
χ◦π◦ρ◦θ
−→ q2
χ◦π◦ρ◦θ
−→ q3
χ◦π◦ρ◦θ
−→ q4
χ◦π◦ρ◦θ
−→ q5
χ◦π◦ρ◦θ
−→ γ.
The weight of its last-round differential (q5, γ) is fully determined by q5 and we can
express it as w(q5). The output difference γ is a value that is compatible with q5 through
23
the round function. There are exactly 2w(q5) output differences that can be reached from
q5, with exactly the same DP . Hence, for each trailQ(∆, γ), the 2w(q5) −1 other trails with
the same ﬁrst ﬁve difference patterns have the same weight. The set of 2w(q5) six-round
trails that have the same sequence of differences as Q(∆, γ), except the last one, have the
same weight. In [21, 44] such sets of trails are called trail preﬁxes. For the weight of a trail
preﬁx, we take the weight of any trail in it. Clearly, Q(∆, γ) is in trail preﬁx Q′(∆, q5). For
our approximation of the collision probability above, we can now write:
Pr(collision) ≈ ∑
γ compatible with q5
2−2w(Q(∆,γ)) (5)
= 2w(q5)2−2w(Q′(∆,q5))
= 2−2w(Q′(∆,q5))+w(q5)
= 2−w(Q′(∆,q5))−w(Q′(∆,q4)) .
Summarizing, Equation (5) gives the probability of a collision if we apply two messages
that differ in two blocks, with the same difference ∆, making the following assumptions:
• There is a single difference q5 such that DP(∆, q5) ≫DP(∆, a) for any a ̸= q5 ,
• The differential DP(∆, q5) is dominated by a single trail.
If we apply n message pairs to KRAVATTE with the given difference, the probability to have
an accumulator collision within at least one such pair is close to n times the expression
of Equation (5). However, there can also be collisions between members of different
pairs. Due to the symmetry in KECCAK -p, we can increase the total collision probability
signiﬁcantly by choosing the values of the pairs in a careful way.
For difference propagation, the round function of KECCAK -p is invariant with respect
to translation in the direction of the z-axis. If the round differential (a, b) has some
weight w(a), then any round differential (a ≪τ, b ≪τ) has the same weight, where
(a ≪ τ, b ≪ τ) denotes (a, b) circularly shifted (or rotated) along z by some offset τ.
This carries over to trails and hence if Q′(∆, q5) has some weight, Q′(∆ ≪τ, q5 ≪τ)
has the same weight.
We can use this to boost the collision probability in the following way. As a starter, we
apply four messages M, M′, M′′ and M′′′ such that Mi + M′
i = M′′
i + M′′′
i = ∆ and
Mi + M′′
i = M′
i + M′′′
i = ∆ ≪1 and the same for blocks with index j. This set has two
pairs with difference ∆, two with difference ∆ ≪1 and two with difference (∆ ≪1) +∆.
The former four pairs each have a collision probability given by Equation (5). The latter
two pairs have an input difference(∆ ≪1) +∆ that typically does not have a low-weight
5-round trail preﬁx starting from it. Hence, this structure of 4 inputs has a collision
probability four times that of Equation (5). The two differences ∆ and ∆ ≪1 can be seen
as basis vectors of a two-dimensional vector space. We can generalize this by adding
∆ ≪ 2, ∆ ≪ 3, etc. as additional basis vectors. Each additional basis vector adds
another difference and hence in a hypercube of dimension d there are in total d2d−1
pairs with collision probability of Equation (5). This technique reaches its limit when we
have exhausted all shift offsets, i.e., when d = 64. A 64-dimensional vector space has
26364 = 269 pairs with each a collision probability given by Equation (5).
Applying n inputs with n = n′264 for an integer n′and with the inputs structured in
vector spaces described as above, gives rise to the following collision probability:
Pr(collision) ≈n′2692−w(Q′(∆,q5))−w(Q′(∆,q4)) = n25−w(Q′(∆,q5))−w(Q′(∆,q4)) .
It is easy to see that w(Q′(∆, q5)) +w(Q′(∆, q4)) is lower bounded by the sum of the
lower bound for 5-round trail weights plus that for 6-round trails. The lower bounds of 50
24
for the weight of trails in KECCAK -p[1600, nr = 5] and of 92 in KECCAK -p[1600, nr = 6]
are directly applicable [21]. Taking these would result in an estimation of the collision
probability of n2−92−50+5 = n2−137. Note that no trails have been found of the given
weights and that it is likely that the best trails have much higher weight, leading to an
even lower collision probability.
7.4.2 The rolling function rollc
The rolling function rollc restricted to the last plane is a linear transformation of maximum-
order. As a consequence, each mask value with non-zero last plane will be in a cycle of
length 2320 −1. Mask values with a last plane equal to zero form ﬁxed points for our
rolling function. We think the probability that a user key K maps to such a mask value is
negligible.
As the new value of x4 only depends on x0 and x1, this allows the parallel computation of
four subsequent iterations.
Examining Equation (5) reveals that the weight of the ﬁrst round differential in the trails
Q′contributes twice to the exponent. This is based on the assumption that the absolute
values of the inputs are randomized sufﬁciently by the (unknown) mask difference so
that there is not exploitable overlap in guessing bits at the input of χ for the two active
blocks. To achieve this, the rolling functionrollc operates on a full plane and the difference
between any two inputs to pc is spread over the full plane. The application of θ, ρ and
π spreads this difference over all bits of the state at the input of the non-linear step χ of
the ﬁrst round. Hence, the conditions imposed by the ﬁrst round differentials translate to
conditions on different bit parities of the pc input.
An important purpose of rollc is to avoid afﬁne spaces of large dimensions. This aspect is
discussed in more details in Section 8.5.
7.4.3 The rolling function rolle
The choice of rolle is motivated by the need to counter the attack described in [ 2] and
summarized in Section 5.3.
It is a lightweight non-linear invertible function written as a recursion on ten lanes of
64 bits. The non-linear term is the bitwise product of two lanes, one of which is shifted
by one position to remove symmetry along the z axis. Linear diffusion is achieved by
two additional terms in the recursion. Because of its lightness, the diffusion takes several
iterations, but it should be enough to counteract the aforementioned attack that requires a
very large number of output blocks.
Compared to rollc, the support rolle is on 10 lanes. As the new value of x9 only depends
on x0, x1 and x2, this allows the parallel computation of eight subsequent iterations. If the
support was only on 5 lanes, this would have either restricted the parallelism of rolle or
the choice of the recursion.
7.4.4 Short-Kravatte
The requirement for SHORT -KRAVATTE is that for any differential (∆, σ), its mean (or
expected) DP over all keys K, denoted as EDP(∆, σ), is below some limit ϵ. Clearly, if the
output is only n bits, then ϵ is at best 2−n. We conjecture that for SHORT -KRAVATTE, with
25
output 1600 −8 bits, ϵ is below 2−137. We base this conjecture on the fact that SHORT -
KRAVATTE has 12 rounds between its input and output, and it is likely that the best attack
is to try constructing a collision in the accumulator. For block length of the block cipher
below 3184 bits the output of SHORT -KRAVATTE is truncated to roughly half this block
length and for block cipher width below 274 bits ϵ will inevitably be larger than 2−137.
7.4.5 The number of rounds in pd and pe
For pe we estimate that taking 6 rounds is sufﬁcient. The difference between any pair of
rolling state values is unknown and can cover two full planes. Moreover, this difference is
very likely to be outside the column parity kernel and hence it will quickly propagate to
high-weight differences [12]. As for the attacks described in [2], we believe the 6 rounds
of pe combined with the non-linearity of rolle provides a non-negligible safety margin.
Moreover, with respect to the attack exploiting many messages that form an afﬁne space
in the accumulator, the fact that pe ◦pd has 12 rounds would require peeling off quite
some rounds to reduce the dimension of the afﬁne space to values that correspond to
reasonable data complexity.
The result is that between any input and any output of KRAVATTE, there are always 18
rounds. We believe this to be sufﬁcient to resist known types of cryptanalysis.
7.5 Implementations
Reference and optimized code for KRAVATTE are available in KECCAK TOOLS and in the
KECCAK code package, respectively [13, 17].
Following a similar work we did for the KANGAROO TWELVE extendable output func-
tion [16], we report on the speed of our current optimized implementation on the Intel R⃝
CoreTM i5-6500 (Skylake). This processor supports the AVX2 instruction set with bitwise
operations on 256-bit registers. Using these instructions, we can exploit the parallelism
present in KRAVATTE and efﬁciently evaluate 4 instances of the KECCAK -p permutation at
once on a single core.
We list the result in Table 1, not only of KRAVATTE itself, but also of KRAVATTE-SAE,
KRAVATTE-SIV and KRAVATTE-WBC. It reports on number of cycles for in- and outputs
that are short (below 200 bytes) and of intermediate size 4096 bytes and the number of
cycles per byte for long in- and outputs. In general, one can observe a discontinuity
as the input/output size crosses a multiple of 200 bytes. In Table 1 this is apparent for
KRAVATTE-WBC: the ﬁrst bump occurs just below 400 bytes, the point where the right
part of the plaintext becomes two blocks instead of one (the left part remains 1 block).
26
Table 1: Performance measured on Skylake (single core).
KRAVATTE
mask derivation 475 cycles
input and output less than 200 bytes 1240 cycles
MAC computation use case:
4096-byte input, output less than 200 bytes 3640 cycles
long inputs 0.58 cycles/byte
Stream encryption use case:
input less than 200 bytes, 4096-byte output 3650 cycles
long outputs 0.59 cycles/byte
KRAVATTE-SAE
Processing of metadata:
metadata less than 200 bytes, no plaintext 1410 cycles
metadata of 4096 bytes, no plaintext 3860 cycles
long metadata 0.61 cycles/byte
Processing of plaintext:
plaintext less than 200 bytes, no metadata 1420 cycles
plaintext of 4096 bytes, no metadata 7710 cycles
long plaintexts 1.39 cycles/byte
KRAVATTE-SIV
plaintext and metadata both less than 200 bytes 3320 cycles
plaintext of 4096 bytes, metadata less than 200 bytes 8710 cycles
long plaintexts 1.43 cycles/byte
KRAVATTE-WBC
≤398 bytes 5930 cycles
≤598 bytes 7410 cycles
≤798 bytes 8990 cycles
≤998 bytes 9530 cycles
2048 bytes 13080 cycles
4096 bytes 15760 cycles
8192 bytes 23420 cycles
16384 bytes 40220 cycles
long block lengths 2.10 cycles/byte
27
8 Non-linearity properties of linear rolling functions
In this section, we give some background on how a linear rolling function can contribute
to the resistance against higher-order differential attacks. We explain higher-order differ-
ential attacks in the context of Farfalle in Section 8.1. Section 8.2 explains how we can
investigate the resistance a rolling function can offer against such attacks and Section 8.3
gives a formula to estimate these characteristics. Finally, in Section 8.4 we report on some
experiments on toy-size rolling functions that conﬁrm our estimations.
8.1 Higher-order diﬀerential attacks
For building pb, pc, pd and pe we have in mind iterating a round function consisting
of a non-linear layer and a linear layer. We think non-linear layers of algebraic degree
2 are an excellent choice for several reasons. Among others, this brings the study of
difference propagation and correlation to the realm of linear algebra. The downside is
that an nr-round permutation only has algebraic degree at most 2nr .
Permutations of low algebraic degree are vulnerable to attacks exploiting higher-order
differentials [39]. We denote a vector space (over GF(2)) by ⟨vi⟩, with {vi}a set of linearly
independent vectors that forms its basis. Its dimension is the number of basis vectors. An
afﬁne space is a vector space translated over an offset (vector) a that is not in the basis and
we denote it as a + ⟨vi⟩. Its dimension is that of the vector space ⟨vi⟩. In a higher-order
differential attack, one exploits the fact that the (bitwise) sum of the output of a function
of algebraic degree d over an afﬁne space of dimension m is a function of algebraic degree
at most d −m of the bits of a. Often, one can even reduce this degree by choosing the
vector space ⟨vi⟩appropriately. One could attack Farfalle by attempting to construct an
input string such that the corresponding sequence of inputs to pc form an afﬁne space of
dimension higher than d. The contribution of such a string to the accumulator, i.e., the
sum of the images of these inputs through pc, is zero. Similarly, if an adversary could
identify, in the sequence of rolling state valuesrollj
e(y), a subset that forms an afﬁne space
of dimension higher than d, the corresponding output blocks of pe would sum to zero,
yielding a distinguisher.
Clearly, these attacks can be prevented by taking sufﬁciently many rounds nr and by
limiting the maximum number of blocks in Farfalle. However, for computational efﬁciency
and latency, we wish to limit the number of rounds. Therefore, adopting a rolling function
that prevents forming afﬁne spaces at the input of pc and at the input of pe is a more
interesting countermeasure against higher-order algebraic attacks.
Let us take a look at the problem of generating four input blocks mi to Farfalle for index
values a, b, c and d such that the input blocks to pc form an afﬁne space of dimension 2 for
an adversary that does not know the mask k. Four binary vectors A, B, C, D form an afﬁne
space iff they sum to zero, i.e., A + B + C + D = 0. This afﬁne space can be expressed
as A + ⟨v0, v1⟩with v0 = A + B and v1 = A + C, yielding A = A + 0, B = A + v0,
C = A + v1 and D = A + v0 + v1. So the adversary must generate the input blocks mi
such that ma + rolla(k) +mb + rollb(k) +mc + rollc(k) +md + rolld(k) =0 or equivalently
ma + mb + mc + md = rolla(k) +rollb(k) +rollc(k) +rolld(k) . (6)
The adversary only has to guess the sum in the righthand side of Equation (6) and any
set of input blocks summing to that value will do. It follows that for this to be infeasible,
the sum at the righthand side must be hard to predict for unknown k. For a linear rolling
28
function, the sum in the righthand side of Equation (6) is a linear function of k that can be
written as M ×k with M a matrix that only depends on indices a, b, c, d. If this matrix has
rank r, knowing the righthand side of Equation (6) requires correctly guessing r bits. So
we must choose our rolling function such that there are no indices a, b, c, d in range [0, n]
for some reasonable value of n that give a matrix M of low rank.
Generating sets of input blocks that form an afﬁne space of higher dimension is even
harder because multiple such equations must be satisﬁed. This is because any afﬁne space
has several subspaces of smaller dimensions. For example, a set of input blocks with
indices a, b, c, d, e, f , g, h form an afﬁne 3-dimensional space if four equations like Equa-
tion (6) are satisﬁed with following index sets: {a, b, c, d}, {e, f , g, h}, {a, b, e, f }, {a, c, e, g}.
Note that the indices can be grouped differently. In general, a set of 2d input blocks forms
an afﬁne d-dimensional space if 2d −d equations like Equation (6) are satisﬁed.
8.2 Subspace properties of linear rolling mask sequences
Any linear permutation acting one bits can be expressed as a multiplication of thee-bit vec-
tor k with a non-singular binary matrix R, so roll(k) =R ×k. Iterating the rolling function
corresponds to exponentiating the matrix:rollt(k) =Rt ×k. So now we consider the afﬁne
spaces in sets {Rj ×k|i ≤j < i + n}. A priori, this leaves many cases to investigate as
there is a huge number of possible rolling functions R, namely ∏0≤d<e
(
2e −2d
)
≈2e2−1.
Moreover, even for a single rolling function there are three parameters: k, i and n. Fortu-
nately, this can be greatly simpliﬁed by considering equivalence.
We can transform R into F = P ×R ×P−1 for P any non-singular matrix and prove
following lemma.
Lemma 1. Let F = P ×R ×P−1 and I an index set of cardinality 2d for some d. Then,
{Rj ×k|j ∈I}is an afﬁne space iff {Fj ×(P ×k) |j ∈I}is an afﬁne space.
Proof. Clearly Fj = P ×Rj ×P−1. Then we can write {Fj ×(P ×k) |j ∈I}as {P ×Rj ×
k|j ∈I}. This is simply equal to {Rj ×k|j ∈I}where P is applied to all its elements. As
an afﬁne space remains an afﬁne space after applying a linear mapping to its elements,
this is an afﬁne space. The proof for the other direction is similar. ⊓ ⊔
By choosing P carefully, we can obtain a matrix F with a particularly simple structure,
called the Frobenius normal form of R [40]. It follows that we can focus our attention to
such matrices. For the rolling functions we are interested in, we can simplify even more.
In particular, we aim for rolling functions with the maximum-order property: the iterated
application to a non-zero mask k results in a single cycle of length 2e −1.
The Frobenius normal form of a maximum-order mapping simply corresponds to the
update function of a linear feedback shift register (LFSR) with the minimal polynomial of
the Frobenius normal form as feedback polynomial [40]. It follows that we can limit our
analysis to state sequences of LFSRs with primitive feedback polynomials. The state of
such an LFSR at time t is simply xtk(x) mod p(x) with p(x) its feedback polynomial and
k(x) its initial state. So, the sequences we investigate are now {xtk(x) mod p(x)|0 ≤t <
n}.
Let us now return to our problem at the end of Section 8.1, in particular, the righthand side
of Equation (6) now becomes k(x)(xa + xb + xc + xd) mod p(x): it is the multiplication of
k(x) with a sum of four monomials. As these are elements in a ﬁeld, their sum is simply
another ﬁeld element. Let xa + xb + xc + xd mod p(x) =d(x). There are now two cases:
Either d(x) is zero or it is non-zero. If zero, the lefthand side of Equation (6) is also zero
29
and the adversary has an easy job in forming an afﬁne space: she just has to choose mi
values that sum to zero. If d(x) ̸= 0, guessing the lefthand side of Equation (6) implies
guessing k fully as k(x) can be computed from it by multiplying with the multiplicative
inverse of d(x). It follows that for the latter case the success probability of forming an
afﬁne space of dimension 2 is 2−e.
It follows that it should be hard to ﬁnd a subset of a sequence of mask values that forms
an afﬁne space. In general, the property that we wish to have is that for any sequence
{rollj(k)|j ≤i < j + n}to contain an afﬁne space of high dimension, n must be very large.
Multiplication by k(x) modulo p(x) is an invertible linear mapping that can be factored
out and hence we can limit our analysis to sequences {xt mod p(x)|0 ≤t < n}. In
particular, we will study the so-called afﬁne span proﬁle of a primitive polynomial.
Deﬁnition 2. The afﬁne span for dimension d of a primitive polynomial p(x) is the
minimum length of a sequence {xi mod p(x)|0 ≤i < n}containing an afﬁne space of
dimension d. We denote it as Lmin(p(x), d),
We call the sequence of values Lmin(p(x), d) for increasing d the afﬁne span proﬁle of
p(x).
For the case d = 2 there is an interesting alternative description. As four vectors t, u, v and
w form an afﬁne space iff t + u + v + w = 0, Lmin(p(x), 2) is the smallest value of n such
that there exist values n1, n2 smaller than n such that 1 + xn1 + xn2 + xn = 0 (mod p(x)).
In other words, n is the degree of the polynomial with smallest degree and Hamming
weight 4 that is a multiple of p(x). For higher dimensions (d > 2), there must be multiple
such polynomials.
8.3 Estimating the aﬃne span proﬁle
In this section, we try to estimate the afﬁne span proﬁle of primitive polynomials using
combinatorics and making randomness assumptions. We can verify the quality of our
estimations by actually computing afﬁne span proﬁles for primitive polynomials of
relatively low degree.
Lemma 2. The probability that a random set of 2d vectors of dimension e forms an afﬁne space is
∏0≤i<d 2e −2i
(2e−1
2d−1) ∏0≤i<d 2d −2i .
Proof. The total number of possible vector spaces of dimension d of e-bit vectors is (see
e.g. [19])
∏0≤i<d 2e −2i
∏0≤i<d 2d −2i .
An afﬁne space is a vector space shifted over an offset. If we select the offset from the
space orthogonal to the vector space, each choice will give another afﬁne space. So, we
choose the offset from a space with dimension e −d and hence the total number of afﬁne
spaces of dimension d of e-bit vectors is:
2e ∏0≤i<d 2e −2i
2d ∏0≤i<d 2d −2i
30
The total probability is this expression divided by the total number of different sets of
e-bit vectors of cardinality 2d, namely (2e
2d).
2e ∏0≤i<d 2e −2i
(2e
2d)2d ∏0≤i<d 2d −2i = ∏0≤i<d 2e −2i
(2e−1
2d−1) ∏0≤i<d 2d −2i .
⊓ ⊔
For the sake of our estimation we assume a sequence of successive LFSR states behaves
like a sequence of different random independent values. A subsequence of length n of
the LFSR states has ( n
2d) subsets. As discussed in Section 8.1, these can however not be
considered independent. Namely, if 2d elements with indices in some index set I form an
afﬁne space, this is also the case for the elements in positions I + j. This partitions the ( n
2d)
subsets of the length-n sequence in classes and in each class all subsets are afﬁne spaces
or none are. Each class has exactly one member with smallest index equal to 0 and hence
we can ﬁx the smallest index to 0. The total number of classes is hence ( n−1
2d−1).
If we assume that modulo this symmetry property, a sequence of LFSR states behaves like
a sequence of different random independent values, the expected number of afﬁne spaces
of dimension d in a subsequence of length n of an e-bit LFSR is:
( n−1
2d−1) ∏0≤i<d 2e −2i
(2e−1
2d−1) ∏0≤i<d 2d −2i =
(n −1)(2d−1) ∏0≤i<d 2e −2i
(2e −1)(2d−1) ∏0≤i<d 2d −2i .
In order to manipulate this expression so that it can be used for our estimations, we
simplify it by making a number of approximations, namely (n −1)(2d−1) ≈n2d−1, (2e −
1)(2d−1) ≈2e(2d−1) and ∏0≤i<d 2e −2i ≈2ed. These approximations are justiﬁed as long
as 2d ≪2e and 2d ≪n. This yields
n2d−1
2(2d−1−d)e ∏0≤i<d 2d −2i
. (7)
We can now estimate Lmin(p(x), d) for some dimensions d and e. A set of n random
vectors is likely to contain an afﬁne space of dimension d if the expected number as
expressed in Equation (7) equals 1. Setting it equal to 1 and solving for n yields
Lmin(p(x), d) ≈2
(
1− d
2d−1
)
e
(
∏
0≤i<d
(
2d −2i
)) 1
2d−1
(8)
If we express Lmin(p(x), d) by its logarithm with base 2: Lmin(p(x), d) =2ν we obtain a
simple expression:
ν ≈
(
1 − d
2d −1
)
e + ϵ(d) ,
with ϵ(d) the binary logarithm of the rightmost term of Equation (8). Table 2 lists the
coefﬁcients for computing Equation (8) for small dimensions.
8.4 Experimental veriﬁcation
Clearly, we agree with John von Neumann that assuming a sequence of successive LFSR
states behaves like a sequence of different random independent values puts us in a state
of sin. To verify the validity of Equation (8) we have done some experimental veriﬁcation.
31
Table 2: Coefﬁcients for estimating the afﬁne span values.
d 2 3 4 5 6 7(
1 − d
2d−1
)
1
3
4
7
11
15
26
31
57
63
120
127
ϵ(d) 0.86 1.06 0.95 0.75 0.54 0.37
22
24
26
28
210
212
214
216
218
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
aﬃne span
degree of the feedback polynomial
d=2d=3d=4
Figure 3: Measured afﬁne span of some primitive pentanomials (marks) vs. estimates
(lines).
We started with primitive trinomials and found that their afﬁne span for dimension 2 does
not obey Equation (8). Namely primitive trinomials systematically exhibit a low value
Lmin(p(x), 2). The reason is that low-degree multiples of trinomials exist with Hamming
weight 4. For trinomial 1 + xa + xe we have (1 + xa + xe) (1 + xa) = 1 + x2a + xe + xa+e. It
follows that Lmin(1 + xa + xe, 2) =a + e. This does not generalize to primitive polynomials
of higher Hamming weight. Naturally, this does not mean that no similar effects would
exist for other types of polynomials, but in our experiments, we did not observe any.
We further computed the afﬁne span values for small dimension d (2, 3 and 4) for the
pentanomials listed in [53] of degrees e from 8 to 48. We report the results in Figure 3.
Although we see large deviations (up to a factor 5) between the measured and estimated
values, the estimates clearly give the trend. The largest deviations occur for dimension 2
and as the dimension grows, the deviations get smaller.
8.5 Application to Kravatte’s rolling function rollc
We found the rolling functionrollc in KRAVATTE using the method proposed in [29], which
goes as follows. We try candidate rolling functions with an efﬁcient implementation until
we have found one that is maximum-order. Many candidates can be generated by varying
some parameters of a simple linear mapping. For each candidate, we determine the
minimal polynomial of the sequence formed by one bit of the state using the Berlekamp-
Massey algorithm [43]. We check whether this is a primitive polynomial of degree e and if
32
so, we have found a maximum-order rolling function. In the notation adopted in [29], the
rolling function rollc looks like this:
(x0, x1, x2, x3, x4) →(x1, x2, x3, x4, (x0 ≪7) +x1 + (x1 ≫3)) ,
where ≪denotes a cyclic shift (or rotation) to the left and ≫a shift to the right.
The subspace properties of the rolling function are determined by its minimal polynomial:
1 + x58 + x74 + x86 + x102 + x116 + x118 + x122 + x129 + x134 + x137 + x138 + x144
+x148 + x186 + x187 + x189 + x195 + x197 + x203 + x211 + x214 + x215 + x218 + x221
+x223 + x229 + x230 + x231 + x232 + x239 + x244 + x246 + x250 + x251 + x253 + x256
+x257 + x259 + x260 + x261 + x262 + x265 + x267 + x272 + x273 + x275 + x276 + x279
+x281 + x282 + x285 + x287 + x292 + x293 + x295 + x296 + x303 + x305 + x313 + x320 .
As this is not a trinomial, we expect the Equation (8) in Section 8.3 to give a reliable estimate
for the afﬁne span proﬁle. In particular, it predicts that we would have to generate a
sequence of more than 2103 masks even before we see an afﬁne space of dimension 2.
9 Conclusions and future work
Farfalle is a versatile new construction for keyed functions in permutation-based sym-
metric cryptography. It can be seen as an inherently parallelizable counterpart of sponge
and duplex. It can better exploit resources available on high-end CPUs such as SIMD
instructions. Yet, the full-state keyed duplex remains the better choice if low-memory
usage is a priority. Note also that Farfalle is inherently keyed and hence is no substitute
for sponge-based hashing.
When considering protections against side-channel attacks, duplex-based modes seem
to offer better resilience. Yet, achieving something similar for Farfalle-SAE could be
done by extending Farfalle, where a third rolling function rollf would be applied on
the output mask k′. This way, the output masks would also evolve at every block. The
rolling functions rollc and rolle would have to affect all bits of the mask and should rather
provide some mixing and non-linearity to all bits instead of just moving part of the bits.
A suitable choice would be a single round of a cryptographic permutation operating on
the full b-bit string. For dealing with multiple Farfalle calls with the same key, or with
incremental inputs, it would be necessary to introduce the ability to take as initial mask
the ﬁnal mask of the previous call. Notice that the introduction of leakage resilience goes
at the expense of some parallelism as the rolling function becomes heavier.
Acknowledgments: We are very grateful to the authors of [33, 2], namely Jian Guo, Ling
Song and a team of cryptanalysts who wish to remain anonymous at this point, for timely
communicating to us their ﬁndings. We would also like to thank Monika Seidlová for
her investigations on higher-order differential attacks, Kay Lukas for his investigations of
rolling functions and Joost Renes for his help on ﬁnite ﬁelds.
References
[1] E. Andreeva, J. Daemen, B. Mennink, and G. Van Assche, Security of keyed sponge
constructions using a modular proof approach, Fast Software Encryption - 22nd Inter-
national Workshop, FSE 2015, Istanbul, Turkey, March 8-11, 2015, Revised Selected
33
Papers (Gregor Leander, ed.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 9054, Springer,
2015, pp. 364–384.
[2] Anonymous, Key-recovery attacks on full KRAVATTE, private communications.
[3] C. Badertscher, C. Matt, Ueli Maurer, P . Rogaway, and B. Tackmann,Robust authenti-
cated encryption and the limits of symmetric cryptography, Cryptography and Coding
- 15th IMA International Conference, IMACC 2015, Oxford, UK, December 15-17,
2015. Proceedings (Jens Groth, ed.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 9496,
Springer, 2015, pp. 112–129.
[4] D. J. Bernstein, How to stretch random functions: The security of protected counter sums, J.
Cryptology 12 (1999), no. 3, 185–192, https://cr.yp.to/papers.html#stretch.
[5] , The Salsa20 family of stream ciphers , 2007, Document ID:
31364286077dcdff8e4509f9ff3139ad, http://cr.yp.to/papers.html#salsafamily.
[6] , Some challenges in heavyweight cipher design , 2016, Presented at Dagstuhl
seminar on Symmetric Cryptography. Schloss Dagstuhl.
[7] G. Bertoni, J. Daemen, S. Hoffert, M. Peeters, G. Van Assche, and R. Van Keer,Farfalle:
parallel permutation-based cryptography, Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2016/1188,
2016, https://eprint.iacr.org/2016/1188.
[8] G. Bertoni, J. Daemen, M. Peeters, and G. Van Assche, On the indifferentiabil-
ity of the sponge construction , Advances in Cryptology – Eurocrypt 2008 (N. P .
Smart, ed.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4965, Springer, 2008, http:
//sponge.noekeon.org/, pp. 181–197.
[9] , Cryptographic sponge functions, January 2011, http://sponge.noekeon.org/.
[10] , Duplexing the sponge: single-pass authenticated encryption and other applications,
Selected Areas in Cryptography (SAC), 2011.
[11] , On alignment in KECCAK , ECRYPT II Hash Workshop 2011, 2011.
[12] , The KECCAK reference, January 2011, http://keccak.noekeon.org/.
[13] G. Bertoni, J. Daemen, M. Peeters, G. Van Assche, and R. Van Keer,KECCAK TOOLS
software, September 2015, https://github.com/gvanas/KeccakTools.
[14] , CAESAR submission: KETJE v2, September 2016, http://ketje.noekeon.
org/.
[15] , CAESAR submission: KEYAK v2, document version 2.2, September 2016, http:
//keyak.noekeon.org/.
[16] , KANGAROO TWELVE : fast hashing based on KECCAK -p, Cryptology ePrint
Archive, Report 2016/770, 2016, http://eprint.iacr.org/2016/770.
[17] , KECCAK code package , June 2016, https://github.com/gvanas/
KeccakCodePackage.
[18] J. Black and P . Rogaway, A block-cipher mode of operation for parallelizable message
authentication, Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2002, International Conference
on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands, April 28 - May 2, 2002, Proceedings (L. R. Knudsen, ed.), Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, vol. 2332, Springer, 2002, pp. 384–397.
[19] C. Bouillaguet, Etudes d’hypothèses algorithmiques et attaques de primitives cryp-
tographiques, thèse de doctorat, Université Paris Diderot, 2011.
34
[20] G. Brassard, P . Hoyer, M. Mosca, and A. Tapp,Quantum amplitude ampliﬁcation and
estimation, Contemporary Mathematics 305 (2002), 53–74.
[21] J. Daemen and G. Van Assche, Differential propagation analysis of KECCAK , Fast Soft-
ware Encryption 2012, 2012.
[22] J. Daemen, B. Mennink, and G. Van Assche, Full-state keyed duplex with built-in multi-
user support, IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive 2017 (2017), 498.
[23] J. Daemen and V . Rijmen,The design of Rijndael — AES, the advanced encryption standard,
Springer-Verlag, 2002.
[24] , A new MAC construction ALRED and a speciﬁc instance ALPHA-MAC , Fast
Software Encryption (H. Gilbert and H. Handschuh, eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 3557, Springer, 2005, pp. 1–17.
[25] , The Pelican MAC function, IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive 2005 (2005), 8.
[26] , Reﬁnements of the ALRED construction and MAC security claims, IET informa-
tion security 4 (2010), 149–157.
[27] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla,The transport layer security (TLS) protocol version 1.2, Network
Working Group of the IETF, RFC 5246, August 2008.
[28] S. Even and Y. Mansour,A construction of a cipher from a single pseudorandom permuta-
tion, J. Cryptology 10 (1997), no. 3, 151–162.
[29] R. Granger, P . Jovanovic, B. Mennink, and S. Neves,Improved masking for tweakable
blockciphers with applications to authenticated encryption , Advances in Cryptology -
EUROCRYPT 2016 - 35th Annual International Conference on the Theory and Appli-
cations of Cryptographic Techniques, Vienna, Austria, May 8-12, 2016, Proceedings,
Part I (Marc Fischlin and Jean-Sébastien Coron, eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 9665, Springer, 2016, pp. 263–293.
[30] L. K. Grover, A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search, Proceedings of
the 28th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing, May 1996 (Gary L.
Miller, ed.), ACM, 1996, pp. 212–219.
[31] S. Gueron, A. Langley, and Y. Lindell,AES-GCM-SIV: Nonce misuse-resistant authenti-
cated encryption, CFRG Internet-Draft, draft-irtf-cfrg-gcmsiv-04, February 2017.
[32] S. Gueron and Y. Lindell, GCM-SIV: full nonce misuse-resistant authenticated encryption
at under one cycle per byte , Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, Denver, CO, USA, October 12-6, 2015
(Indrajit Ray, Ninghui Li, and Christopher Kruegel, eds.), ACM, 2015, pp. 109–119.
[33] J. Guo and L. Song,Cube attack against full Kravatte, Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report
2017/1026, 2017, https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/1026.
[34] V . Tung Hoang, T. Krovetz, and P . Rogaway,Robust authenticated-encryption AEZ
and the problem that it solves , Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2015 - 34th
Annual International Conference on the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic
Techniques, Soﬁa, Bulgaria, April 26-30, 2015, Proceedings, Part I (Elisabeth Oswald
and Marc Fischlin, eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 9056, Springer,
2015, pp. 15–44.
[35] M. A. Simplício Jr. and P . S. L. M. Barreto,Revisiting the security of the ALRED design
and two of its variants: Marvin and LetterSoup , IEEE Trans. Information Theory 58
(2012), no. 9, 6223–6238.
35
[36] M. A. Simplício Jr., P . d’A. F. F. S. Barbuda, P . S. L. M. Barreto, T. C. M. B. Carvalho,
and C. B. Margi, The MARVIN message authentication code and the LETTERSOUP
authenticated encryption scheme , Security and Communication Networks 2 (2009),
no. 2, 165–180.
[37] H. Krawczyk, LFSR-based hashing and authentication , Advances in Cryptology -
CRYPTO ’94, 14th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa Barbara,
California, USA, August 21-25, 1994, Proceedings (Y. Desmedt, ed.), Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 839, Springer, 1994, pp. 129–139.
[38] T. Krovetz, HS1-SIV (v2), 2015, Submission to CAESAR competition.
[39] X. Lai, Higher order derivatives and differential cryptanalysis , Communications and
Cryptography (R. E. Blahut, D.J. Costello, U. Maurer, and T. Mittelholzer, eds.), The
Springer Series in Engineering and Computer Science, vol. 276, Springer US, 1994,
pp. 227–233 (English).
[40] D. Lay, S. Lay, and J. McDonald,Linear algebra and its applications, 5 ed., Pearson, 2016.
[41] M. Luby and C. Rackoff, How to construct pseudorandom permutations from pseudoran-
dom functions, SIAM J. Comput. 17 (1988), no. 2, 373–386.
[42] S. Lucks, Faster Luby-Rackoff ciphers, Fast Software Encryption, Third International
Workshop, Cambridge, UK, February 21-23, 1996, Proceedings (Dieter Gollmann,
ed.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 1039, Springer, 1996, pp. 189–203.
[43] J. L. Massey, Shift-register synthesis and BCH decoding, IEEE Trans. Information Theory
15 (1969), no. 1, 122–127.
[44] S. Mella, J. Daemen, and G. Van Assche, New techniques for trail bounds and application
to differential trails in Keccak , IACR Trans. Symmetric Cryptol. 2017 (2017), no. 1,
329–357.
[45] B. Mennink, R. Reyhanitabar, and D. Vizár,Security of full-state keyed sponge and duplex:
Applications to authenticated encryption, Advances in Cryptology - ASIACRYPT 2015,
New Zealand, 2015 (T. Iwata and J. H. Cheon, eds.), LNCS, vol. 9453, Springer, 2015,
pp. 465–489.
[46] M. Naor and O. Reingold, On the construction of pseudorandom permutations: Luby-
Rackoff revisited, J. Cryptology 12 (1999), no. 1, 29–66.
[47] NIST, Federal information processing standard 180-1, secure hash standard, April 1995.
[48] , Federal information processing standard 180-2, secure hash standard , August
2002.
[49] , Federal information processing standard 202, SHA-3 standard: Permutation-based
hash and extendable-output functions , August 2015, http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/
NIST.FIPS.202.
[50] The Tor Project, Tor project: Anonymity online, https://www.torproject.org/.
[51] P . Rogaway and T. Shrimpton, Deterministic authenticated-encryption: A provable-
security treatment of the key-wrap problem, IACR Cryptology ePrint Archive 2006 (2006),
221.
[52] T. Ylonen and C. Lonvick,The secure shell (SSH) protocol architecture, Network Working
Group of the IETF, RFC 4251, January 2006.
[53] M. Zivkovi´ c,Table of primitive binary polynomials, Math. Comp 63 (1994), 38–5.
36
A Versions of Kravatte
As work in progress, the deﬁnition of KRAVATTE has evolved since its ﬁrst appearance on
the IACR ePrint archive [7].
• “KRAVATTE initial release”, as in [7, version 20170101:153600]. There was only a
written deﬁnition, without any implementation. The number of rounds was 6 for
pb, pc and pe. The deﬁnition of Farfalle did not include pd then.
• “KRAVATTE 6644”, as in [7, version 20170717:134002]. The speciﬁcations came with
reference code in [13, commit of July 17th, 2017] and with optimized code in [ 17,
commit of July 18th, 2017]. Compared to the previous version, the deﬁnition of
Farfalle underwent signiﬁcant improvements, and KRAVATTE followed accordingly.
We increased the number of rounds to(6, 6, 4, 4) for (pb, pc, pd, pe) mainly to address
the high-order differential attack described in Section 5.4. A more detailed log of the
changes can be found in Appendix B of [7, version 20170717:134002].
• “KRAVATTE Achouffe”, as in this paper. In the light of the attacks in [ 33, 2], we
increased the number of rounds to (6, 6, 6, 6) for (pb, pc, pd, pe) and switched to a
non-linear rolling function for rolle.
37
