=== page 1 ===
Under consideration for publication in J. Functional Programming 1
E D U C A T I O N A L P E A R L
A Nanopass Framework for Compiler Education∗
Dipanwita Sarkar Oscar Waddell R. Kent Dybvig
Microsoft Corporation Abstrax, Inc. Indiana University
dipas@microsoft.com owaddell@abstrax.com dyb@cs.indiana.edu
Abstract
A compiler structured as a small number of monolithic passes is diﬃcult to understand
and diﬃcult to maintain. The steep learning curve is daunting, and even experienced
developers ﬁnd that modifying existing passes is diﬃcult and often introduces subtle and
tenacious bugs. These problems are especially frustrating when the developer is a student
in a compiler class. An attractive alternative is to structure a compiler as a collection
of many ﬁne-grained passes, each of which performs a single task. This structure aligns
the implementation of a compiler with its logical organization, simplifying development,
testing, and debugging. This paper describes the methodology and tools comprising a
framework for constructing such compilers.
1 Introduction
Production compilers often exhibit a monolithic structure in which each pass per-
forms several analyses, transformations, and optimizations. An attractive alterna-
tive, particularly in an educational setting, is to structure a compiler as a collection
of many small passes, each of which performs a small part of the compilation pro-
cess. This “micropass” structure aligns the implementation of a compiler with its
logical organization, yielding a more readable and maintainable compiler. Bugs that
arise are more easily isolated to a particular task, and adding new functionality is
easier since new code need not be grafted onto existing passes nor wedged between
two logical passes that would have been combined in a monolithic structure.
Each pass of a micropass compiler performs a single speciﬁc task to simplify,
verify, convert, analyze, or improve the code. A simpliﬁcation pass reduces the
complexity of subsequent passes by translating its input into a simpler intermediate
language, e.g., replacing pattern matching constructs with more primitive code. A
veriﬁcation pass checks compiler invariants that are not easily expressed within the
grammar, e.g., that all bound variables are unique. A conversion pass makes explicit
an abstraction that is not directly supported by the low-level target language, e.g.,
transforming higher order procedures into explicitly allocated closures. An analysis
pass collects information from the input program and records that information with
annotations in the output program, e.g., annotating each lambda expression with
∗ A preliminary version of this article was presented at the 2004 International Conference on
Functional Programming.
=== page 2 ===
2 Dipanwita Sarkar, Oscar Waddell, R. Kent Dybvig
expr − → constant | (quote datum) | var
| (set! var expr) | (if expr expr) | (if expr expr expr)
| (begin expr expr*) | (lambda (var *) expr expr*)
| (let ((var expr)*) expr expr*)
| (letrec ((var expr)*) expr expr*)
| (primitive expr*) | (expr expr*)
Fig. 1. A small but representative Scheme subset
its set of free variables. An improvement pass attempts to decrease the run time or
resource utilization of the program.
While simpliﬁcation and conversion passes alter the intermediate language in
some way, each veriﬁcation or improvement pass produces a program in the same
intermediate language as its input program so that we may selectively enable or
disable individual checks or optimizations simply by not running the corresponding
passes. Veriﬁcation passes are enabled only during compiler development, where
they can help identify bugs in upstream passes. The ability to disable optimizations
supports compiler switches that trade code quality for compile-time speed and is
also useful for regression testing when optimizations may mask bugs in seldom-
executed portions of other passes.
A few years ago we switched to the micropass structure in our senior- and
graduate-level compiler courses. Students are supported in the writing of their com-
pilers by several tools: a pattern matcher with convenient notations for recursion
and mapping, macros for expanding the output of each pass into executable code,
a reference implementation of the compiler, a suite of (terminating) test programs,
and a driver. The driver runs the compiler on each of the programs in the test suite
and evaluates the output of each pass to verify that it returns the same result as
the reference implementation. Intermediate-language programs are all represented
as s-expressions, which simpliﬁes both the compiler passes and the driver.
The switch to the micropass methodology and the tools that support it have
enabled our students to write more ambitious compilers. Each student in our one-
semester compiler class builds a 50-pass compiler from the s-expression level to
Sparc assembly code for the subset of Scheme shown in Figure 1. The compiler in-
cludes several optimizations as well as a graph-coloring register allocator. Students
in the graduate course implement several additional optimizations. The passes in-
cluded in the compiler for a recent semester are listed in Table 1. Due to space
limitations, we cannot go into the details of each pass, but the pass names are
suggestive of their roles in the compilation process.
The micropass methodology and tools are not without problems, however. The
repetitive code for traversing and rewriting abstract syntax trees can obscure the
meaningful transformations performed by individual passes. In essence, the sheer
volume of code for each pass can cause the students to miss the forest for the trees.
Furthermore, we have learned the importance of writing out grammars describing
the output of each pass as documentation, but the grammars are not enforced.
Thus, it is easy for an unhandled speciﬁc case to fall through to a more general
=== page 3 ===
Nanopass Framework 3
Week 1: simpliﬁcation
verify-scheme1
rename-var
remove-implicit-begin1
remove-unquoted-constant
remove-one-armed-if
verify-a1-output1
Week 2: assignment conv.
remove-not
mark-assigned
optimize-letrec2
remove-impure-letrec
convert-assigned
verify-a2-output1
Week 3: closure conversion
optimize-direct-call
remove-anon-lambda
sanitize-binding-forms
uncover-free
convert-closure
optimize-known-call3
uncover-well-known2
optimize-free2
optimize-self-reference2
analyze-closure-size1
lift-letrec
verify-a3-output1
Week 4: canonicalization
introduce-closure-prims
remove-complex-constant
normalize-context
verify-a4-output1
Week 5: encoding/allocation
specify-immediate-repn
specify-nonimmediate-repn
Week 6: start of UIL compiler
verify-uil
Week 7: labels and temps
remove-complex-opera*
lift-letrec-body
introduce-return-point
verify-a7-output1
Week 8: virtual registerizing
remove-nonunary-let
uncover-local
the-return-of-set!
ﬂatten-set!
verify-a8-output1
Week 9: brief digression
generate-C-code4
Week 10: register alloc. setup
uncover-call-live2
optimize-save-placement2
eliminate-redundant-saves2
rewrite-saves/restores2
impose-calling-convention
reveal-allocation-pointer
verify-a10-output1
Week 11: live analysis
uncover-live-1
uncover-frame-conﬂict
strip-live-1
uncover-frame-move
verify-a11-output1
Week 12: call frames
uncover-call-live-spills
assign-frame-1
assign-new-frame
optimize-fp-assignments2
verify-a12-output1
Week 13: spill code
ﬁnalize-frame-locations
eliminate-frame-var
introduce-unspillables
verify-a13-output1
Week 14: register assignment
uncover-live-2
uncover-register-conﬂict
verify-unspillables1
strip-live-2
uncover-register-move
assign-registers
assign-frame-2
ﬁnalize-register-locations
analyze-frame-traﬃc1
verify-a14-output1
Week 15: assembly
ﬂatten-program
generate-Sparc-code
Table 1. Passes assigned during a recent semester, given in running order and
grouped roughly by week and primary task. Notes: 1Supplied by the instructor.
2Challenge passes required of graduate students, not necessarily in the week shown.
3Actually written during Week 4. 4Not included in ﬁnal compiler. During Week 6,
students also had an opportunity to turn in updated versions of earlier passes.
Week 9 was a short week leading up to spring-break week. Most passes are run
once, but the passes comprising the main part of the register and frame allocator
are repeated until all variables have been given register or frame homes.
case, resulting in either confusing errors or malformed output to trip up later passes.
Finally, the resulting compiler is slow, which leaves students with a mistaken im-
pression about the speed of a compiler and the importance thereof.
To address these problems, we have developed a “nanopass” methodology and a
domain-speciﬁc language for writing nanopass compilers. A nanopass compiler dif-
fers from a micropass compiler in three ways: (1) the intermediate-language gram-
mars are formally speciﬁed and enforced; (2) each pass needs to contain traversal
code only for forms that undergo meaningful transformation; and (3) the interme-
diate code is represented more eﬃciently as records, although all interaction with
the programmer is still via the s-expression syntax. We use the word “nanopass”
=== page 4 ===
4 Dipanwita Sarkar, Oscar Waddell, R. Kent Dybvig
to indicate both the intended granularity of passes and the amount of source code
required to implement each pass.
The remainder of this paper describes the nanopass methodology and supporting
tools. Section 2 describes the tools that are used to build nanopass compilers. Sec-
tion 3 presents an example set of language and pass deﬁnitions. Section 4 describes
the implementation of nanopass tools. Section 5 discusses related work. Section 6
presents our conclusions and discusses future work.
2 Nanopass tools
This section describes tools for deﬁning new intermediate languages and compiler
passes. These tools comprise a domain-speciﬁc language for writing nanopass com-
pilers and are implemented as extensions of the host language, Scheme, via the
syntax-case macro system (Dybvig et al. , 1993). This approach provides access to
the full host language for deﬁning auxiliary procedures and data structures, which
are particularly useful when writing complex passes, such as a register allocation
pass.
2.1 Deﬁning intermediate languages
Intermediate language deﬁnitions take the following form:
(deﬁne-language name { over tspec+ } where production+)
The optional tspec declarations specify the terminals of the language and introduce
metavariables ranging over the various terminals. Each tspec is of the form
(metavariable+ in terminal )
where the terminal categories are declared externally. A metavariable declaration
for x implicitly speciﬁes metavariables of the form xn, where n is a numeric suﬃx.
Each production corresponds to a production in the grammar of the intermediate
language.
A production pairs a nonterminal with one or more alternatives, with an optional
set of metavariables ranging over the nonterminal.
({ metavariable+ in } nonterminal alternative +)
Productions may also specify elements that are common to all alternatives using
the following syntax.
({ metavariable+ in } (nonterminal common +) alternative+)
Common elements may be used to store annotations, e.g., source information or
analysis byproducts, that are common to all subforms of the intermediate language.
Each alternative is a metavariable or parenthesized form declaring an interme-
diate language construct, followed by an optional set of production properties
property+. Parenthesized forms typically begin with a keyword and contain sub-
structure with metavariables specifying the language category into which each sub-
form falls. Since parenthesized forms are disambiguated by the beginning keyword,
=== page 5 ===
Nanopass Framework 5
(deﬁne-language L0 over
(b in boolean)
(n in integer)
(x in variable)
where
(Program Expr)
(e body in Expr
b n x
(if e1 e2 e3)
(seq c1 e2) => (begin c1 e2)
(lambda (x ... ) body)
(e0 e1 ... ))
(c in Cmd
(set! x e)
(seq c1 c2) => (begin c1 c2)))
L0 − → Program
Program − → Expr
Expr − → boolean | integer | var
| (if Expr Expr Expr)
| (seq Cmd Expr)
| (lambda (var *) Expr )
| (Expr Expr*)
Cmd − → (set! var Expr)
| (seq Cmd Cmd)
Fig. 2. A simple language deﬁnition and the corresponding grammar
at most one alternative of a production may be a parenthesized form that does not
begin with a keyword. This allows the intermediate language to include applications
using the natural s-expression syntax. Each property is a key, value pair. Proper-
ties are used to specify semantic, type, and ﬂow information for the associated
alternative.
Figure 2 shows a simple language deﬁnition and the grammar it represents. It
deﬁnes metavariables x, b, and n ranging over variables, booleans, and integers,
and deﬁnes three sets of productions. The ﬁrst set deﬁnes Program as an Expr.
The second deﬁnes metavariables e and body ranging over Expr and declares that
Expr is a boolean, integer, variable reference, if expression, seq expression, lambda
expression, or application. The third deﬁnes metavariable c ranging over Cmd and
declares that Cmd is a set! command or seq command.
The semantics of each intermediate language form may be speciﬁed implicitly via
its natural translation into the host language, if one exists. In Figure 2, this implicit
translation suﬃces for booleans, numbers, variable references, lambda, set!, if,
and applications. For seq expressions, the translation is speciﬁed explicitly using
the => (translates-to) property. Implicit and explicit translation rules establish the
meaning of an intermediate language program in terms of the host language. This is
an aid to understanding intermediate language programs and provides a mechanism
whereby the output of each pass can be veriﬁed to produce the same results as the
original input program while a compiler is being debugged. Explicit translations
can become complex, in which case we often express the translation in terms of a
syntactic abstraction (macro) deﬁned in the host language.
2.2 Language inheritance
Consecutive intermediate languages are often closely related due to the ﬁne granu-
larity of the intervening passes. To permit concise speciﬁcation of these languages,
the deﬁne-language construct supports a simple form of inheritance via the
=== page 6 ===
6 Dipanwita Sarkar, Oscar Waddell, R. Kent Dybvig
extends keyword, which must be followed by the name of a base language, al-
ready deﬁned:
(deﬁne-language name extends base
{ over { mod tspec }+ }
{ where { mod production }+ })
The terminals and productions of the base language are copied into the new lan-
guage, subject to modiﬁcations in the over and where sections of the deﬁnition,
either of which may be omitted if no modiﬁcations to that section are necessary.
Each mod is either +, which adds new terminals and productions, or -, which re-
moves the corresponding terminals and productions. The example below deﬁnes a
new language L1 derived from L0 (Figure 2) by removing the boolean terminal
and Expr alternative and replacing the Expr if alternative with an Expr case
alternative.
(deﬁne-language L1 extends L0
over
- (b in boolean)
where
- (Expr b (if e1 e2 e3))
+ (default in Expr
(case x (n1 e1) . . . default)))
Language L1 could serve as the output of a conversion pass that makes language-
speciﬁc details explicit en route to a language-independent back end. For example,
C treats zero as false, while Scheme provides a distinct boolean constant #f rep-
resenting false. Conditional expressions of either language could be translated into
case expressions in L1 with language-speciﬁc encodings of false made explicit.
Language inheritance is merely a notational convenience. A complete language
deﬁnition is generated for the new language, and this deﬁnition behaves exactly as
if it had been written out fully.
2.3 Deﬁning passes
Passes are speciﬁed using a pass deﬁnition construct that names the input and
output languages and speciﬁes transformation functions that map input-language
forms to output-language forms:
(deﬁne-pass name input-language -> output-language transform ∗)
Analysis passes are often run purely for eﬀect, e.g., to collect and record information
about variable usage. For such passes, the special output language void is used.
Similarly, the special output language datum is used when a pass traverses an AST
to compute some more general result, e.g., an estimate of object code size.
Each transform speciﬁes the transformer’s name, a signature describing the trans-
former’s input and output types, and a set of clauses implementing the transfor-
mation.
=== page 7 ===
Nanopass Framework 7
(name : nonterminal arg ∗ -> val+
{ (input-pattern { guard } output-expression) }∗)
The input portion of the signature lists a nonterminal of the input language followed
by the types of any additional arguments expected by the transformer. The output
portion lists one or more result types. Unless void or datum is speciﬁed in place
of the output language, the ﬁrst result type is expected to be an output-language
nonterminal.
Each clause pairs an input-pattern and a host-language output-expression that
together describe the transformation of a particular input-language form. Input
patterns are speciﬁed using an s-expression syntax that extends the syntax of alter-
natives in the production for the corresponding input-language nonterminal. Sub-
patterns are introduced by commas, which indicate, by analogy to quasiquote and
unquote (Kelsey et al. , 1998), portions of the input form that are not ﬁxed. For
example, (seq (set! ,x ,n) ,e2) introduces three subpatterns binding pattern
variables x, n, and e2. Metavariables appearing within patterns impose further con-
straints on the matching process. Thus, the given pattern matches only those inputs
consisting of a seq form whose ﬁrst subform is a set! form that assigns a numeric
constant to a variable, and whose second subform is an Expr.
Pattern variables are used within input patterns to constrain the matching of
subforms of the input AST. They also establish variable bindings that may be used
in output expressions to refer to input subforms or the results of structural recur-
sion. The various forms that subpatterns may take are summarized below, where
the metavariable a ranges over alternate forms of an input-language nonterminal
A, and the metavariable b ranges over alternate forms of an output-language non-
terminal B .
1. The subpattern ,a matches if the corresponding input subform is a form of
A and binds a to the matching subform.
2. The subpattern ,[f : a -> b] matches if the corresponding input subform
is a form of A, binds a to the input subform, and binds b to the result of
invoking f on a. An error is signaled if the result type is not a form of B .
3. The subpattern ,[a -> b] is equivalent to ,[f : a -> b] if f is the sole
transformer mapping A → B.
4. The subpattern ,[b] is equivalent to the subpattern ,[a -> b] in contexts
where the input form is constrained by the language deﬁnition to be a form
of A, except that no variable is bound to the input subform.
Transformers may accept multiple arguments and return multiple values. To sup-
port these transformers, the syntax ,[f : a x ∗ -> b y ∗] may be used to supply
additional arguments x∗ to f and bind program variables y∗ to the additional val-
ues returned by f . The ﬁrst argument must be an AST as must the ﬁrst return
value, unless void or datum is speciﬁed as the output type. Subpatterns 3 and 4
are extended in the same way to support the general forms ,[a x ∗ -> b y ∗] and
,[b y ∗]. Pattern variables bound to input subforms may be referenced among the
extra arguments x∗ within structural-recursion patterns 2 and 3 above. Metavari-
=== page 8 ===
8 Dipanwita Sarkar, Oscar Waddell, R. Kent Dybvig
ables are used within patterns to guide the selection of appropriate transformers
for structural recursion.
When present, the optional guard expression imposes additional constraints on
the matching of the input subform prior to any structural recursion speciﬁed by the
subpattern. Pattern variables bound to input forms are visible within guard expres-
sions. Output expressions may contain templates for constructing output-language
forms using syntax that extends the syntax of alternatives in the production for
the corresponding output-language nonterminal.
New abstract syntax trees are constructed via output templates speciﬁed using
an overloaded quasiquote syntax that constructs record instances rather than list
structure. Where commas, i.e., unquote forms, do not appear within an output
template, the resulting AST has a ﬁxed structure. An expression preﬁxed by a
comma within an output template is a host-language expression that must be eval-
uated to obtain an AST to be inserted as the corresponding subform of the new
AST being produced. For example, ‘(if (not ,e1) ,e2 ,e3) constructs a record
representing an if expression with an application of the primitive not as its test
and the values of program variables e1, e2, and e3 inserted where indicated. An
error is signaled if a subform value is not a form of the appropriate output-language
nonterminal.
Where ellipses follow an unquote form in an output template, the embed-
ded host-language expressions must evaluate to lists of objects. For example,
‘(let ((,x ,e) . . .) ,body) requires that x be bound to a list of variables and
e be bound to a list of Expr forms.
Often, a pass performs nontrivial transformation for just a few forms of the in-
put language. In such cases, the two intermediate languages are closely related and
the new language can be expressed using language inheritance. When two inter-
mediate languages can be related by inheritance, a pass deﬁnition needs to specify
transformers only for those forms that undergo meaningful change, leaving the im-
plementation of other transformers to a pass expander . The pass expander completes
the implementation of a pass by consulting the deﬁnitions of the input and output
languages. Strong typing of passes, transformers, and intermediate languages helps
the pass expander to automate these simple transformations. The pass expander
is an important tool for keeping pass speciﬁcations concise. Intermediate language
inheritance and the pass expander together provide a simple and expedient way to
add new intermediate languages and corresponding passes to the compiler.
3 Example: Assignment Conversion
Assignment conversion is a transformation that replaces assigned variables with
mutable data structures to make the locations of assigned variables explicit. For
example, assignment conversion would translate the program
(lambda (a b) (seq (set! a b) a))
into the following.
=== page 9 ===
Nanopass Framework 9
; mark-assigned runs for eﬀect over programs in language L1, marking each
; assigned variable by setting a ﬂag in its record structure.
(deﬁne-pass mark-assigned L1 -> void
(process-command : Command -> void
[(set! ,x ,[e])
(set-variable-assigned! x #t)]))
; convert-assigned produces a program in language L2 from a program in language
; L1, creating an explicit location (pair) for each assigned variable and rewriting
; references and assignments accordingly.
(deﬁne-pass convert-assigned L1 -> L2
(process-expr : Expr -> Expr
[,x (variable-assigned x) ‘(primapp car ,x)]
[(lambda (,x ... ) ,[body])
(let-values ([(xi xa xr) (split-vars x)])
‘(lambda (,xi ... )
(let ((,xa (primapp cons ,xr #f)) ... )
,body)))])
(process-command : Command -> Command
[(set! ,x ,[e]) ‘(primapp set-car! ,x ,e)]))
; split-vars is used by convert-assigned to introduce temporaries for assigned
; variables.
(define split-vars
(lambda (vars)
(if (null? vars)
(values ’() ’() ’())
(let-values ([(ys xas xrs) (split-vars (cdr vars))])
(if (variable-assigned (car vars))
(let ([t (make-variable ’tmp)])
(values (cons t ys) (cons (car vars) xas) (cons t xrs))
(values (cons (car vars) ys) xas xrs)))))))
Fig. 3. Assignment conversion
(lambda (t b)
(let ((a (cons t #f)))
(seq (set-car! a b) (car a))))
Assignment conversion involves two passes. The ﬁrst pass, mark-assigned, locates
assigned variables i.e., those appearing on the left-hand side of an assignment, and
marks them by setting a ﬂag in one of the ﬁelds of the variable record structure. The
second pass, convert-assigned, rewrites references and assignments to assigned
variables as explicit structure accesses or mutations.
The mark-assigned pass runs for eﬀect only over programs in a language L1 that
may be derived from L0 (Figure 2) by adding the forms let and primapp and the
terminal primitive:
=== page 10 ===
10 Dipanwita Sarkar, Oscar Waddell, R. Kent Dybvig
(deﬁne-language L1 extends L0
over
+ (pr in primitive)
where
+ (Expr
(let ((x e) . . .) body)
(primapp pr e . . .))
+ (Command
(primapp pr e . . .)))
Since convert-assigned removes the set! form, its output language, L2, is derived
from its input language L1 to reﬂect this change.
(deﬁne-language L2 extends L1 where - (Command (set! x e)))
The code for both passes is shown in Figure 3. Each pass deals with just those
language forms that undergo meaningful transformation and relies on the pass-
expander to supply the code for the remaining cases.
Only one language form, set!, need be handled explicitly by the ﬁrst of the two
passes. If the input is a set! command, the pass simply sets the assigned ﬂag in
the record structure representing the assigned variable and recursively processes
the right-hand-side expression via the ,[·] syntax.
The second pass handles three forms explicitly: variable references, lambda ex-
pressions, and assignments. It binds each assigned variable to a pair whose car is
the original value of the variable, replaces each reference to an assigned variable
with a call to car, and replaces each assignment with a call to set-car!.
4 Implementation
From a student’s perspective, a language deﬁnition speciﬁes the structure of an in-
termediate language in terms of the familiar s-expression syntax. All of the student’s
interactions with the intermediate language occur via this syntax. Internally, how-
ever, intermediate language programs are represented more securely and eﬃciently
as record structures (Illustration 1).
Intermediate language programs are also evaluable in the host language, us-
ing the translation properties attached to production alternatives. To support
these diﬀering views of intermediate language programs, a language deﬁned via
deﬁne-language implicitly deﬁnes the following items:
1. a set of record types representing the abstract syntax trees (ASTs) of
intermediate-language programs,
2. a parser mapping s-expressions to record structure,
3. an unparser mapping record structure to s-expressions, and
4. a partial parser mapping s-expression patterns to record schema.
These products are packaged within a module and may be imported where they
are needed. The remainder of this section describes these products and how they
are used.
=== page 11 ===
Nanopass Framework 11
(lambda (x) (if x (foo x) (bar x)))
#[x.expr.l0 bar] (#[x.expr.l0 x])]]
#[app.expr.l0
#[x.expr.l0 foo] (#[x.expr.l0 x])]
#[x.expr.l0 x]
#[if.expr.l0
#[lambda.program.l0 (x)
#[app.expr.l0
Illustration 1. All compiler-writer interactions are via the s-expression syntax.
4.1 Record-type deﬁnitions
A language deﬁnition automatically generates a set of record deﬁnitions as illus-
trated for language L0 in Figure 4. A base record type is constructed for the lan-
guage along with a subtype for each nonterminal. The subtype for each nonterminal
declares the common elements for that nonterminal. A new record type is also cre-
ated for each alternative as a subtype of the corresponding nonterminal.
4.2 Parser
Each language deﬁnition produces a parser capable of transforming s-expressions
to the corresponding record structure representing the same abstract syntax tree.
The parser for the ﬁrst input language serves as the ﬁrst pass of the compiler (after
lexical analysis and parsing) and provides the record-structured input required by
subsequent passes of the compiler. The parsers for other intermediate languages
simplify debugging and experimentation by making it easy to obtain inputs suitable
for any given pass.
Figure 5 shows part of the code for the parser that is generated by the language
deﬁnition for L0 in Figure 2. The code for the parser mirrors the language def-
inition. The language deﬁnition produces a set of mutually recursive procedures,
parse-program, parse-expr and parse-command, each handling all the alterna-
tives of the corresponding nonterminal. The nonterminal parsers operate by recur-
sive descent on list structured input, following the grammar.
4.3 Unparser
The unparser converts the AST records to their corresponding host-language ex-
ecutable forms. Like the parser this also serves as a good debugging aid by al-
lowing the student to view the output of any pass in host-language form. It en-
ables the student to trace and manually translate programs, e.g., during the ex-
ploratory phase of the development of a new optimization. Each record-type deﬁni-
tion stores the parenthesized form and the host-language form for the alternative.
=== page 12 ===
12 Dipanwita Sarkar, Oscar Waddell, R. Kent Dybvig
(define-record L0 ())
(define-record program L0 ())
(define-record expr L0 ())
(define-record command L0 ())
(define-record b.expr expr (b))
(define-record n.expr expr (n))
(define-record x.expr expr (x))
(define-record if.expr expr (e1 e2 e3))
(define-record seq.expr expr (c1 c2))
(define-record lambda.expr expr (xs body))
(define-record app.expr expr (e0 es))
(define-record set!.command command (x e))
(define-record seq.command command (c1 c2))
Fig. 4. Record deﬁnitions generated for L0
(define (parser-lang.L0 s-exp)
(define (parse-program s-exp) )
(define (parse-expr s-exp)
(if (pair? s-exp)
(cond
[(and (eq? ’seq (car s-exp)) (= 3 (length s-exp)))
(make-seq.expr.L0.6
(parse-command (cadr s-exp))
(parse-expr (caddr s-exp)))]
[else
(make-anon.7
(parse-expr (car s-exp))
(map parse-expr (cdr s-exp)))])
(cond
[(boolean? s-exp) (make-b.expr.L0.1 s-exp)]
[else (error )])))
(define (parse-command s-exp) )
(parse-program s-exp))
Fig. 5. Parser generated for L0
The host-language form, if diﬀerent from the parenthesized form, is expressed as
the translates-to production property in the language deﬁnition, as in the case of
(seq c1 e2) => (begin c1 e2) in Figure 2. Each record type stores the infor-
mation required to unparse instances of itself. As a result, all languages share one
unparse procedure.
The unparser can also translate the record structures into their implied paren-
thesized forms, i.e., with no host-language translations, allowing the student to
pretty-print intermediate language code.
=== page 13 ===
Nanopass Framework 13
4.4 Partial Parser
The partial parser is used to support input pattern matching and output construc-
tion, which are described in Section 4.5 and Section 4.6.
The partial parser translates s-expression syntax representing an input pattern or
output template into its corresponding record schema. A record schema is similar
to a record structure except that the variable parts of the s-expression pattern are
converted to a special list representation that is later used to generate code for the
pass. The structures produced by the partial parser are not visible to the student,
but are used to generate the code for matching the given pattern and constructing
the desired output.
4.5 Matching input
When invoked, a transformer matches its ﬁrst argument, which must be an AST,
against the input pattern of each clause until a match is found. Clauses are examined
in order, with user-speciﬁed clauses preceding any clauses inserted by the pass
expander. This process continues until the input pattern of some clause is found
to match the AST and the additional constraints imposed by guard expressions
and pattern variables are satisﬁed. When a match is found, any structural recursive
processing is performed and the corresponding output expression is evaluated to
produce a value of the expected result type. An error is signaled if no clause matches
the input.
Input patterns are speciﬁed using an s-expression syntax that extends the syntax
of alternatives for the corresponding nonterminal with support for pattern variables
as described in Section 2.3.
4.6 Constructing output
When the input to a transformer matches the input pattern of one of the clauses,
the corresponding output expression is evaluated in an environment that binds
the subforms matched by pattern variables to like-named program variables. For
example, if an input language record representing (set! y (f 4)) matches the
pattern (set! ,x ,[e]), the corresponding output expression is evaluated in an
environment that binds the program variables x and e to the records representing
y and the result of processing (f 4). When a pattern variable is followed by an
ellipsis ( . . .) in the input pattern, the corresponding program variable is bound to
a matching list of records.
The record constructors available within output templates are determined by
the output language speciﬁed in the pass deﬁnition. Instantiating the output tem-
plate must produce an AST representing a form of the output nonterminal for the
transformer containing the clause. The syntax of output templates is described in
Section 2.3.
=== page 14 ===
14 Dipanwita Sarkar, Oscar Waddell, R. Kent Dybvig
5 Related work
Our automatically generated parsers and unparsers are similar to the language-
speciﬁc functions that read and write the language-speciﬁc data structures gener-
ated by tree-like intermediate languages in the Zephyr Abstract Syntax Deﬁnition
Language (ASDL). ASDL focuses solely on intermediate representation and there-
fore does not integrate support for deﬁning passes.
The TIL compiler operates on a series of typed intermediate languages (Tarditi
et al. , 1996), allowing the output of each pass to be statically type-checked. The
unparsers produced by our language deﬁnitions for each intermediate language allow
us to generate semanticaly equivalent host-language programs with which we can
similarly verify static and dynamic properties, e.g., via control-ﬂow analysis.
Polyglot (Nystrom et al. , 2003) ensures that the work required to add new passes
or new AST node types is proportional to the number of node types or passes
aﬀected, doing so with some fairly involved OOP syntax and mechanics. Our pass
expander and our support for language inheritance approach the same goal with
less syntactic and conceptual overhead.
Tm is a macro processor in the spirit of m4 that takes a source code template
and a set of data structure deﬁnitions and generates source code (van Reeuwijk,
1992). Tree-walker and analyzer templates that resemble deﬁne-pass have been
generated using Tm (van Reeuwijk, 2003). These templates are low-level relatives of
deﬁne-pass, which provides convenient input pattern syntax for matching nested
record structures and output template syntax constructing nested record structures.
The PFC compiler (Allen & Kennedy, 1982) uses macro expansion to ﬁll in boiler-
plate transformations, while the object-oriented SUIF system (Aigner et al. , 2000a;
Aigner et al. , 2000b), which operates on a single intermediate language, allows
boilerplate transformations to be inherited. The nanopass approach achieves eﬀects
similar to these systems but extends them by formalizing the language deﬁnitions,
including suﬃcient information in the language deﬁnitions to allow automated con-
version to and from the host language, and separating traversal algorithms from
intermediate language and pass deﬁnitions.
6 Conclusions
The nanopass methodology supports the decomposition of a compiler into many
small pieces. This decomposition simpliﬁes the task of understanding each piece
and, therefore, the compiler as a whole. There is no need to “shoe-horn” a new
analysis or transformation into an existing monolithic pass. The methodology also
simpliﬁes the testing and debugging of a compiler, since each task can be tested
independently, and bugs are easily isolated to an individual task.
The nanopass tools enable a compiler student to focus on concepts rather than
implementation details while having the experience of writing a complete and sub-
stantial compiler. While it is useful to have students write out all traversal and
rewriting code for the ﬁrst few passes to understand the process, the ability to
focus only on meaningful transformations in later passes reduces the amount of
=== page 15 ===
Nanopass Framework 15
tedium and repetitive code. The code savings are signiﬁcant for many passes. With
our old tools, remove-not was the smallest pass at 25 lines; it is now 7 lines. Simi-
larly, convert-assigned was 55 lines and is now 20 lines. On the other hand, the
sizes of a few passes cannot be reduced. The code generator, for example, must
explicitly handle every grammar element.
Our experience indicates that ﬁne-grained passes work extremely well in an ed-
ucational setting. We are also interested in using the nanopass technology to con-
struct production compilers, where the overhead of many traversals of the code
may be unacceptable. To address this potential problem, we plan to develop a pass
combiner that can, when directed, fuse together a set of passes into a single pass,
using deforestation techniques (Wadler, 1988) to eliminate rewriting overhead.
Acknowledgements. Dan Friedman suggested the use of small, single-purpose
passes and contributed to an earlier compiler based on this principle. Erik Hilsdale
designed and implemented the matcher we used to implement micropass compilers.
Our input-pattern subpatterns were inspired by this matcher. Jordan Johnson im-
plemented an early prototype of the nanopass framework. Comments by Matthias
Felleisen led to several improvements in the presentation. Dipanwita Sarkar was
funded by a gift from Microsoft Research University Relations.
References
Aigner, G., Diwan, A., Heine, D., Lam, M., Moore, D., Murphy, B., & Sapuntzakis, C.
(2000a). An overview of the SUIF2 compiler infrastructure. Tech. rept. Stanford Uni-
versity.
Aigner, G., Diwan, A., Heine, D., Lam, M., Moore, D., Murphy, B., & Sapuntzakis, C.
(2000b). The SUIF2 compiler infrastructure. Tech. rept. Stanford University.
Allen, J.R., & Kennedy, K. (1982). Pfc: A program to convert fortran to parallel form.
Technical Report MASC-TR82-6. Rice University, Houston, TX.
Dybvig, R. Kent, Hieb, Robert, & Bruggeman, Carl. (1993). Syntactic abstraction in
Scheme. Lisp and symbolic computation, 5(4), 295–326.
Kelsey, Richard, Clinger, William, & (Editors), Jonathan A. Rees. (1998). Revised 5 report
on the algorithmic language Scheme. Sigplan notices, 33(9), 26–76.
Nystrom, N., Clarkson, M., & Myers, A. (2003). Polyglot: An extensible compiler frame-
work for Java. Pages 138–152 of: Proceedings of the 12th international conference on
compiler construction. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2622. Springer-Verlag.
Tarditi, D., Morrisett, G., Cheng, P., Stone, C., Harper, R., & Lee, P. (1996). TIL: a
type-directed optimizing compiler for ML. Pages 181–192 of: Proceedings of the acm
sigplan 1996 conference on programming language design and implementation.
van Reeuwijk, C. (1992). Tm: a code generator for recursive data structures. Software
practice and experience, 22(10), 899–908.
van Reeuwijk, C. (2003). Rapid and robust compiler construction using template-based
metacompilation. Pages 247–261 of: Proceedings of the 12th international conference on
compiler construction. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2622. Springer-Verlag.
Wadler, P. (1988). Deforestation: Transforming programs to eliminate trees. Pages 344–
358 of: ESOP ’88: European symposium on programming. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 300. Springer-Verlag.
