=== page 1 ===
A Nanopass Framework for
Commercial Compiler Development
Andrew W. Keep
University of Utah
akeep@cs.utah.edu
R. Kent Dybvig
Cisco Systems Inc.
dyb@cisco.com
Abstract
Contemporary compilers must typically handle sophisticat ed high-
level source languages, generate efﬁcient code for multipl e hard-
ware architectures and operating systems, and support sour ce-level
debugging, proﬁling, and other program development tools. As a
result, compilers tend to be among the most complex of softwa re
systems. Nanopass frameworks are designed to help manage th is
complexity. A nanopass compiler is comprised of many single -
task passes with formally deﬁned intermediate languages. T he per-
ceived downside of a nanopass compiler is that the extra pass es
will lead to substantially longer compilation times. To det ermine
whether this is the case, we have created a plug replacement f or the
commercial Chez Scheme compiler, implemented using an updated
nanopass framework, and we have compared the speed of the new
compiler and the code it generates against the original comp iler for
a large set of benchmark programs. This paper describes the u p-
dated nanopass framework, the new compiler, and the results of
our experiments. The compiler produces faster code than the origi-
nal, averaging 15–27% depending on architecture and optimi zation
level, due to a more sophisticated but slower register alloc ator and
improvements to several optimizations. Compilation times average
well within a factor of two of the original compiler, despite the
slower register allocator and the replacement of ﬁve passes of the
original 10 with over 50 nanopasses.
Categories and Subject Descriptors D.3.4 [ Programming Lan-
guages]: Processors—Translator writing systems and compiler
generators
General Terms Languages
Keywords Compiler, Nanopass, Scheme
1. Introduction
A compiler is typically structured as a series of passes, eac h ana-
lyzing source or intermediate code for an input program and p ossi-
bly producing new intermediate code, with the ﬁnal pass prod ucing
[Copyright notice will appear here once ’preprint’ option i s removed.]
assembly or machine code for a target architecture. Histori cally,
compilers employed no more than a few passes, because each pa ss
involved reading source or intermediate code from cards, ta pe, or
disk.
Contemporary compilers, on the other hand, take advantage of large
physical memories and virtual address spaces to keep interm ediate
representations in memory. At the same time, contemporary c om-
pilers are substantially more complex, having been called u pon to
handle larger, higher-level source languages, to generate efﬁcient
code for multiple hardware architectures and operating sys tems, to
support automatic storage management, threading, and othe r run-
time activities, and to support debugging, proﬁling, and ot her de-
velopment tools. While it might be possible to support the ad di-
tional complexity with the same small number of passes, it is no
longer important or desirable to do so.
An attractive alternative is to separate a compiler into man y, per-
haps dozens, of single-task passes. This improves modulari ty, po-
tentially making the compiler easier to maintain and extend . Con-
structing a compiler with many single-task passes, however , can
require excessive boilerplate code to recur through unchan ging
forms, increasing compiler size and thus failing to decreas e main-
tenance and extension overhead. If intermediate languages are not
well speciﬁed, having many passes also increases the risk of errors
due to inconsistencies among passes.
A nanopass framework is designed to address these challenges with
a domain-speciﬁc language (DSL) that supports formally deﬁ ned
intermediate languages, a convenient pattern matching syn tax im-
plemented via inexpensive record dispatch, and automatic g enera-
tion of boilerplate code. When a paper on the ﬁrst nanopass fr ame-
work was accepted for ICFP 2004 [20], however, the program com-
mittee required the authors to refocus the paper on educatio n be-
cause they did not believe the nanopass methodology was suit able
for commercial compilers. They were principally concerned with
the compile-time overhead of repeated traversals. This concern was
impossible to refute at the time because the prototype infrastructure
and implementation were not mature enough to put to the test.
This paper describes a nanopass infrastructure that is suitable for
developing commercial compilers. To establish the infrast ructure’s
suitability for commercial compiler development, we set ou t to de-
velop a compiler that is 100% compatible with the existing co m-
mercial Chez Scheme [5] compiler, produces code that is at le ast
on par with the original compiler, and does so with compile ti mes
that are within a factor of two of the original compiler, desp ite our
separate ambition to incorporate a new, slower register all ocator.
An extensive test suite, used to test the original compiler, is used
to demonstrate the new compiler is compatible with the origi nal,
while a large set of benchmarks is used to establish its performance.
On the benchmarks, the new compiler produces code that is 15–
1 2013/9/20
=== page 2 ===
(define-language Lsrc
(terminals
(uvar (x))
(primitive (pr))
(datum (d)))
(Expr (e body)
x
(quote d)
(if e0 e1 e2)
(begin e* . . . e)
(lambda (x* . . .) body)
(let ([x* e*] . . .) body)
(letrec ([x* e*] . . .) body)
(set! x e)
(pr e* . . .)
(call e e* . . .) => (e e* . . .)))
Figure 1. The Lsrc language
27% faster than the original compiler, depending on archite cture
and optimization level, with compile times that are well wit hin the
factor of two budget.
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the n ew
nanopass framework and compares it with the original framew ork.
Section 3 describes the differences between the new and orig i-
nal Chez Scheme compiler. Section 4 evaluates the run-time a nd
compile-time performance of the new compiler against the or iginal
compiler. Section 5 presents related work, and Section 6 concludes.
2. The nanopass framework
A nanopass framework is a domain-speciﬁc language (DSL)
for writing compilers. It provides two main syntactic forms :
define-language for formally deﬁning the intermediate-language
grammars and define-pass for specifying passes that operate
over these intermediate languages. Formally deﬁning the in terme-
diate languages allows the framework to ﬁll in boilerplate c ode in
passes, permits passes to check that output-language terms are well
formed, and allows the framework to represent language term s
as records internally while maintaining an S-expression pa ttern-
matching and template-construction syntax.
The new nanopass framework builds on the prototype describe d by
Sarkar et al. [20]. This section brieﬂy describes the new fra mework
and differences between this framework and the prototype. M ore
information can be found in the ﬁrst author’s dissertation [ 14].
Examples are extracted from a student compiler used in a cour se
on compiler implementation, since the Chez Scheme compiler is
not open-source.
2.1 Deﬁning languages
Languages deﬁnitions are similar to context-free grammars , in that
they are composed of a set of terminals, a set of nonterminal
symbols, a set of productions for each nonterminal, and a sta rt
symbol. An intermediate language deﬁnition for a simple var iant of
the Scheme programming language, post macro expansion, mig ht
look like Lsrc in Figure 1.
The Lsrc language consists of three terminals (listed in the
terminals form) and a single nonterminal.
For each terminal, the compiler writer must supply a corresp ond-
ing predicate. The framework adds a ? to the terminal name to de-
termine the predicate name. In this case, the nanopass frame work
expects uvar?, primitive?, and datum? to be lexically visible
(define-language L1
(extends Lsrc)
(terminals
(- (datum (d)))
(+ (constant (c))))
(Expr (e body)
(- (quote d))
(+ (quote c))))
Figure 2. The L1 language
where Lsrc is deﬁned. Each terminal clause lists one or more meta-
variables, used to refer to the terminal in nonterminal prod uctions.
For instance, x refers to a uvar.
The Lsrc language declares the nonterminal Expr. Nonterminals
specify a name, a set of meta-variables, and a set of grammar
productions. The Expr nonterminal has two meta-variables, e and
body. These meta-variables, like the terminal meta-variables, are
used to represent the nonterminal in a production.
Productions follow one of three forms: a single meta-variable, an S-
expression that starts with a keyword, or an S-expression th at does
not start with a keyword (referred to as an implicit production).
Productions cannot include keywords past the initial keywo rd.
The x production is the only single-meta-variable production an d
indicates that a uvar is an Expr. The only implicit S-expression
production is (pr e* . . .), which speciﬁes a primitive call with
zero or more arguments. (The . . . following e* indicates that
e* contains a list of Expr, the * sufﬁx is used by convention to
indicate plurality.) The (call e e* . . .) production indicates
a procedure call, and the call keyword differentiates it from a
primitive call production. The => (e e* . . .) syntax indicates
a pretty form for the production. The define-language form
deﬁnes an unparser, and the unparser uses the pretty form whe n
unparsing this production. The remaining productions corr espond
to the Scheme syntax that they represent.
2.2 Extending languages
The ﬁrst pass of our student compiler is a simple expander tha t
produces Lsrc language forms from S-expressions. The next pass
expands complex quoted datum constants into code to constru ct
these constants at load time.
The compiler writer could fully specify the output language , as we
did with Lsrc. Fully specifying each language, however, results in
verbose source code, particularly in a compiler with many in ter-
mediate languages. To avoid this, the framework supports a l an-
guage extension form that succinctly describes only change s from
one language to another. Figure 2 shows the output language.
The L1 language removes the datum terminal and replaces it with
the constant terminal. It also replaces the (quote d) production
with a (quote c) production to indicate that only constants are
allowed in the quote form.1 The extends clause indicates a lan-
guage extension form. Terminals are removed using the - clause
and added using the + clause. Productions in a nonterminal are also
removed using the - clause and added using the + clause.
2.3 Deﬁning passes
The pass in Figure 3 converts an input program from the Lsrc
intermediate language to the L1 intermediate language. This pass
1 If we failed to replace the (quote d) form, it would result in an error,
since the d meta-variable is not bound in the new language.
2 2013/9/20
=== page 3 ===
(define-pass convert-complex-datum : Lsrc (x) -> L1 ()
(definitions
(define const-x* ’())
(define const-e* ’())
(define datum->expr
(with-output-language (L1 Expr)
(lambda (d)
(cond
[(pair? d) ‘(cons ,(datum->expr (car d))
,(datum->expr (cdr d)))]
[(vector? d)
(let ([n (vector-length d)])
(if (fxzero? n)
‘(make-vector (quote 0))
(let ([t (unique-name ’t)])
‘(let ([,t (make-vector
(quote ,n))])
(begin
,(map (lambda (i v)
‘(vector-set! ,t
(quote ,i)
,(datum->expr v)))
(iota n)
(vector->list d)) . . .
,t)))))]
[else ‘(quote ,d)])))))
(Expr : Expr (ir) -> Expr ()
[(quote ,d) (guard (not (constant? d)))
(let ([t (unique-name ’t)])
(set! const-x* (cons t const-x*))
(set! const-e* (cons (datum->expr d) const-e*))
t)])
(let ([x (Expr x)])
(if (null? const-x*)
x
‘(let ([,const-x* ,const-e*] . . .) ,x))))
Figure 3. The convert-complex-datum pass
removes the structured quoted datum by making the construction of
the data explicit. To avoid constructing these constants mo re than
once at run time, the pass also lifts datum creation to the sta rt of the
program.
A pass deﬁnition starts with a name and a signature. The signa ture
speciﬁes the input language (in this case, Lsrc) and list of formals
(x) followed by the output language ( L1) and a list of extra return
expressions (()).
Following the name and signature, this pass speciﬁes deﬁnit ions
for const-x*, const-e*, and datum->expr in the definitions
clause. These deﬁnitions are scoped at the same level as the t rans-
formers in the pass. The const-x* and const-e* variables are
initialized to null. The const-x* is extended with a new uvar and
const-e* is extended with a new Expr each time a structured
quoted datum is encountered. The datum->expr procedure recur-
sively processes a structured quoted datum and produces the L1
Expr needed to construct it. Recursion terminates when a quoted
constant is found.
Next, a transformer from the input nonterminal Expr to the output
nonterminal Expr is deﬁned. The transformer is named Expr and
has a signature similar to that of the pass, with an input-lan guage
nonterminal and list of formals followed by the output-lang uage
nonterminal and list of extra-return-value expressions.
The transformer has a single clause that matches a quoted dat um
and uses a guard to ensure it is a pair or a vector. The define-pass
macro autogenerates clauses matching the other input-lang uage
forms and producing equivalent output-language forms.
Each user-supplied clause consists of an input pattern, an o ptional
guard clause, and one or more expressions that specify zero or
more return values. The input pattern is derived from the pro -
ductions speciﬁed in the input language. Pattern variables are un-
quoted, i.e., preceded by ,. For instance, the clause for the quote
production matches the pattern (quote ,d) and binds d to the
datum speciﬁed by the quote form.
The output-language expression is constructed using a quas iquoted
template. In the example, the quoted output-language expre ssion
is in the datum->expr procedure. Here, quasiquote, ( ‘), is re-
bound to a form that constructs language forms based on the te m-
plate, and unquote ( ,), is used to escape back into Scheme. The
,(datum->expr (car d)) thus puts the result of the recursive
call to datum->expr into the output-language (cons ,e0, e1)
form.
Following the Expr transformer is the body of the pass, which calls
Expr to transform the Lsrc Expr term into an L1 Expr term and
wraps the result in a let expression if any structured quoted datums
are found in the program that is being compiled.
2.4 Comparison with the prototype nanopass framework
The prototype nanopass framework demonstrated that a nanop ass
framework is a viable approach to writing compilers, but onl y the
ﬁrst half of the student compiler was ever implemented using the
framework. As such, the prototype framework has some rough
edges that needed to be smoothed out in order to implement a
replacement for the Chez Scheme compiler. The new nanopass
framework focused on improvements in two areas, usability a nd
performance.
On the usability side, the new nanopass framework introduce s
new features and improves error reporting. In the new framew ork,
language deﬁnitions are no longer restricted to the top-lev el and
can appear anywhere a Scheme deﬁnition can appear. Passes ca n
be deﬁned without an input language or output language, allo w-
ing a pass to take a non-language term as input or generate a
non-language term as output. This allows passes to create ge n-
eral parsers, predicates, and code generators. Passes can a lso take
additional arguments and return additional values, allowi ng infor-
mation to ﬂow through a pass without being encoded in the lan-
guage term. Language terms can be constructed outside of a pa ss
using the with-output-language form, as shown in Figure 3 and
matched outside a pass using the nanopass-case form. The cata-
morphisms [17] syntax, used to recur on a sub-form of a langua ge
term in a pattern, supports passing extra arguments to trans formers
expecting more than one argument.
Error reporting has been improved, both to make messages eas -
ier to understand and to include source information for wher e
the error occurred. Language deﬁnitions perform better che cking,
e.g., ensuring meta-variables are not repeated, removed pr oduc-
tions existed in the base language, and the ﬁelds of a product ion
are uniquely named.
On the performance side, the new nanopass framework uses an
integer tag to perform pattern matching, which is slightly f aster
than the record dispatch previously used. In transformers, the order
of clauses is respected, so that programmers can place claus es that
are more likely to match ﬁrst. The new framework also generat es
less code, so compiling a compiler generated with the nanopa ss
framework is faster.
3 2013/9/20
=== page 4 ===
3. The new Chez Scheme compiler
Chez Scheme is a commercial Scheme compiler for R6RS Scheme
with extensions, ﬁrst released in 1985 [5] and under continu ous
development and improvement since. The compiler is written in
Scheme and is comprised of 10 large, multipurpose passes. Th e
compiler is almost absurdly fast, able to compile its own sou rce
code in roughly three seconds on contemporary hardware. The
compiler is also designed to generate efﬁcient code.
3.1 Workings of the existing Chez Scheme compiler
The compiler begins with a syntax-case expander, extended with
a module system and R6RS libraries [6, 8, 12, 23]. The expande r
produces a simpliﬁed core language with letrec, letrec*, and
case-lambda as binding forms, quoted constants, primitive refer-
ences, procedure calls, variable references, and a handful of other
forms. The ﬁrst pass records source information used for deb ug-
ging and proﬁling. The next pass places validity checks for v ari-
able references bound by letrec and letrec* [13, 24]. The next
pass is the source optimizer [22] and can be run one or more tim es
or not at all, depending on the options set in the compiler. A p ass
for handling letrec and letrec* [13, 24] is run at least once
and is run after each run of the source optimizer. After this, either
the interpreter is invoked to interpret the program or the ba ck-end
compiler is invoked to ﬁnish compilation and either execute the re-
sulting code or write the machine code to the ﬁle system.
When the back-end compiler is invoked, the code is still in ro ughly
the same form as the input language, although letrec* has been
eliminated and letrec bindings bind only unassigned variables
to case-lambda expressions. The compiler performs assignment
conversion, closure conversion, various optimizations, a nd further
code simpliﬁcations and replaces primitives in the source l anguage
with an internal set of simpler, although still higher level than as-
sembly language, primitives. It also performs register allocation us-
ing a linear-scan style register allocator with a lazy register save and
restore strategy [3], and generates code using destination -driven
code generation [7].
The back end consists of ﬁve passes. The ﬁrst pass, cp1, begins the
process of closure conversion, recognizes loops, recogniz es direct
application of λ-expressions, begins handling multiple return value
calls, sets up the foreign and foreign callable expressions , and con-
verts primitive calls into a set of slightly lower-level inl ine calls.
The next pass, cpr0, begins the register allocation process, deter-
mines the actual free variables of closures after performin g closure
optimization, performs assignment conversion, makes expl icit all
arguments to inlined primitives, and ﬂags tail calls and loo ps. The
register allocator reserves the architectural stack regis ter, a Scheme
frame pointer register, a thread context register pointer, and at least
two temporary registers, depending on the target machine ar chitec-
ture, for use by the assembler. After this, the pass cpr1 assigns
variables to their initial register homes. The cpr2 pass ﬁnishes reg-
ister allocation, generating register saves and restores a cross non-
tail calls and removing redundant register bindings. Finally, the cp2
pass ﬁnishes compilation, converting the higher-level inlined prim-
itives into a set of high-level instruction inlines that the assembler
can convert into machine instructions for the target platfo rm. Each
of these back-end passes performs several optimizations in addition
to those mentioned above, and some optimizations span multi ple
passes.
3.2 Workings of the new compiler
The new compiler starts with the same set of front-end passes ,
updated to use the nanopass framework.
The back end of the new compiler diverges signiﬁcantly from t hat
of the original compiler. Where the original compiler is str uctured
as a set of multipurpose passes that each performs several ta sks,
the new compiler is organized as approximately 50 passes, wi th
each pass completing primarily one task, using approximate ly 35
nanopass languages.
These passes implement most of the optimizations from the or ig-
inal compiler and improve on some, including support for im-
plicit cross-library optimization, improvements to closu re opti-
mization [15], and improved handling of procedures that ret urn
multiple values.
The other big difference between the original compiler and t he
new compiler is the use of a graph-coloring register allocat or.
This change necessitated several other changes in the compi ler,
including the expansion of code into a near-assembly langua ge
form much earlier in the compiler, so that all of the temporar ies
that might be needed for the ﬁnal code to conform to the operan d
requirements of the machine can be met. It also means that a fu ll
live analysis must be performed to compute the conﬂict graph
needed by the register allocator. In the original compiler, the cost
of the live analysis is largely avoided by tracking the liven ess
of registers, rather than the liveness of variables. Additi onally, in
the original compiler, primitive expansion is delayed unti l code
generation at the cost of reserving two or more registers, de pending
on the target architecture.
The beneﬁt of using a graph-coloring register allocator is t hat it
packs spilled variables tighter on the frame, makes better u se of
registers, and generally produces more compact code. The ne w
register allocator also uses move biasing to avoid frame-to -frame
moves. This contributes to the generated code’s faster run t ime,
at the cost of substantially more compile-time overhead. Bo th the
original and new compilers try to make good use of variable sa ves
and restores around non-tail calls, allowing call-live var iables to be
accessed from a register, rather than from the frame. The ori ginal
compiler follows a lazy-save strategy [3], while the new com piler
attempts to get similar results by using a heuristic that est imates the
cost of saving and restoring versus the cost of spilling to a f rame
location permanently. This is one place where the new compil er
sometimes underperforms the original compiler.
Not all of the optimizations provided by the original compil er
are provided by the new compiler. The most signiﬁcant missin g
optimization is block allocation of closures. When several closures
are created at the same time, a single allocation is performe d to
allocate the space for the entire group of closures. A more ge neral
block allocation optimization is planned for the new compil er but
has not yet been implemented.
3.3 Ensuring compatibility
Over the course of Chez Scheme’s development, an extensive s uite
of unit, functional, and regression tests has been develope d to
ensure that the compiler conforms to the relevant Scheme standards
and documentation for Chez Scheme extensions. Chez Scheme i s
also bootstrapped, and the ﬁrst test of the compiler is to com pile
itself and verify that code generated for the compiler is con sistent
with each run of the compiler. The new compiler passes all of t hese
tests.
4. Evaluation of the new Chez Scheme compiler
4.1 Comparing the speed of generated code
We compare the performance of the original and new compilers
on a set of benchmarks that includes the R6RS benchmarks [4]; a
4 2013/9/20
=== page 5 ===
set of benchmarks, including some larger benchmarks, used t o test
the source optimizer; and a set of additional benchmarks use d for
performance regression testing.
The benchmark data was generated on an Intel Core i7-3960X wi th
two CPUs, six cores per CPU, and 64 GB of RAM. The tests
were conducted at both optimize level 2 (run-time type-chec king
enabled) and optimize level 3 (run-time type-checking disa bled),
using both the 32-bit and 64-bit instruction sets. Table 1 sh ows the
average improvement in run time for benchmarks compiled wit h
the new compiler over the original compiler. In the worst cas e,
optimize level 3 with the 64-bit instruction set, the benchm arks still
run 15.0% faster on average.
x86 machine x86 64 machine
Optimize Level 2 26.6% 22.0%
Optimize Level 3 22.3% 15.0%
Table 1. Average improvement in benchmark run times
Two of the benchmarks, similix, a self-applicable partial eval-
uator, and softscheme, a benchmark that performs soft typing,
make use of the compiler during the run of the benchmark. This
negatively affects the run time of these benchmarks and the o verall
average. Table 2 shows the normalized run time of these bench -
marks on both the 32-bit and 64-bit versions of the compiler a nd at
both optimization levels.
Opt. level Machine type Similix Soft Scheme
2 x86 1.54 1.27
2 x86 64 1.41 1.32
3 x86 1.29 1.22
3 x86 64 1.39 1.24
Table 2. Normalized run times of similix and softscheme
Outside of these two outliers, the performance ranges on the 32-bit
version between 0.417 and 1.05 at optimize level 2 and betwee n
0.457 and 1.05 at optimize level 3. It ranges on the 64-bit ver sion
between 0.519 and 1.03 at optimize level 2 and between 0.489 a nd
1.14 at optimize level 3.
As discussed in Section 3.2, the new compiler contains sever al
improvements over the original compiler, and each of these c on-
tributes to the better performance of the benchmarks. The bi ggest
contributing factor, and the one that is consistent in all of the bench-
marks, is the graph-coloring register allocator. The graph -coloring
register allocator makes more efﬁcient use of available reg isters,
which is particularly helpful on the 32-bit Intel target, wh ere only
eight registers are available.
4.2 Comparing compilation speed
We set out with the goal of implementing a new compiler that
ran within a factor of two of the original compiler. The extra
compile-time budget was intended to allow the more expensiv e
graph-coloring register allocator to be incorporated into the new
compiler. Ideally, we would have created a nanopass compile r as
near in function to old compiler as possible for apples-to-a pples
compile-time comparisons, but we did not have the resources to
create two new compilers.
The two compilers were tested by compiling each benchmark ﬁv e
times and averaging compile times. The compile times are nor mal-
ized, using the original compiler as a base. Table 3 presents the
normalized numbers by machine type and optimization level. In
the worst case (the 64-bit version at optimize level 2) the av erage
compile time is a factor of 1.75 longer on the new compiler tha n
on the original compiler. This time is well within our factor of two
goal. Nevertheless, further tuning is still possible and wi ll make
the compile times for the new compiler even closer to those of the
original compiler.
x86 machine x86 64 machine
Optimize Level 2 1.71 1.75
Optimize Level 3 1.64 1.71
Table 3. Normalized compile times of benchmarks
The compile time varies from one benchmark to another. On the
32-bit version, the normalized time ranges from a factor of 1 .00 to
4.44 at optimize level 2 and 0.968 to 3.13 at optimize level 3. On
the 64-bit version, normalized time ranges from a factor of 1 .00 to
4.73 at optimize level 2 and 1.00 to 3.80 at optimize level 3.
It is natural to assume that the variance in compile times is r elated
to the increased computational complexity of the graph-col oring
register allocator; however, this does not seem to be the cas e.
Figure 4 shows the normalized times versus the lines of expan ded
source code. The number of lines of expanded source code is
determined by pretty printing the results of the expander ru n on
each benchmark and then counting the number of line breaks.
Overall, there does not seem to be a direct relationship betw een
the number of lines of expanded code and the normalized compi le
time. An understanding of why this occurs might lead to overa ll
improvements in compile time.
 0.5
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
 4
 4.5
 5
 1  10  100  1000  10000  100000
a6le - o2
a6le - o3
i3le - o2
i3le - o3
Figure 4. Normalized compile time vs. expanded source code size
5. Related work
Stratego/XT [2] is a DSL for writing source-to-source trans forma-
tions. It provides a set of combinators for matching and rebu ilding
abstract syntax tree (AST) forms as well as strategies for pe rform-
ing different traversals of the AST. Pattern matching and AS T con-
struction in Stratego is different from that in the nanopass frame-
work, because if construction of an AST fails, the next patte rn
will be tried, whereas the nanopass framework makes a commit ted
(deterministic) choice with explicit guards for extra-gra mmatical
checks, which simpliﬁes debugging and improves compiler sp eed.
The JastAdd [9] system allows for the construction of modula r and
extensible compilers using Java’s object-oriented class h ierarchy,
along with an external DSL to specify the AST and analysis and
transformations on the AST. Each type of node in the AST has an
5 2013/9/20
=== page 6 ===
associated class that encapsulates the transformations on the node
type. Method dispatch and aspects are used with the visitor p attern
to implement passes instead of pattern matching.
SableCC [11] is a system for building compilers and interpre ters
in Java. It provides a set of tools for writing the lexer and pa rser
for the language and a method for deﬁning multiple passes. Si milar
to JastAdd, it works on an AST represented by Java classes. Al so
similar to JastAdd, it uses the visitor pattern to implement the
language transformations.
POET combines a transformation language and an empirical testing
system to allow transformation to be tuned [26]. Although PO ET
allows for some generic manipulation of an AST, it is largely
focused on targeting speciﬁc regions of source code to be tun ed.
It can parse fragments of source code and operate on the AST
fragment, preserving unparsed code across the transformat ion.
The ROSE [18] compiler infrastructure provides a C++ librar y for
source-to-source transformation, along with front-ends a nd back-
ends for both C/C++ and Fortran. Internally, ROSE represent s
source code using the ROSE Object-Oriented IR, with transfo rma-
tions written in C++. Although there is nothing speciﬁc that ties the
ROSE transformation framework to C/C++ or Fortran, there ar e no
tools to easily add new front-ends and back-ends, limiting t he use-
fulness of ROSE for other languages.
The Rhodium framework takes a different approach from the ot her
tools described here. Instead of using term rewriting, Rhod ium
bases transformations on data-ﬂow equations and provides a frame-
work for proving the soundness of transformations [16, 21]. The
framework has also been extended to support inferring optim iza-
tions from the data-ﬂow semantics deﬁned by the compiler wri ter.
The data-ﬂow facts are deﬁned over a C-like intermediate represen-
tation. This might be a good complement to the nanopass frame -
work.
CodeBoost [1] is a more targeted tool. Although it was origin ally
developed to support the Sophus numerical library, CodeBoo st
provides a simple way to write compiler transformations wit hin
C++ code. It is implemented using Stratego but provides an ar ray
of tools to make writing C++ code transformations easier.
The template-based metacompiler (Tm) [19] provides a macro lan-
guage, similar to M4, for generating data structures and transforma-
tions that can be expanded in a language agnostic way. Tm provides
tree-walker and analyzer templates and an existing C back-e nd for
easier use.
Pavilion [25] is a DSL for writing analysis and optimization passes
to improve the efﬁciency of generic programming in C++. The
declarative language extends regular expressions with int ersection
and complement operators, variable quantiﬁcation, path qu antiﬁca-
tion, function deﬁnition, and native language access to Sch eme to
provide powerful matching during analysis and transformat ion.
Y oko [10] is a Haskell module for writing functions that tran sform
an input type to a similar output type that requires only the i nter-
esting cases be speciﬁed, similar to how the nanopass framew ork
operates over languages. The module builds on generic progr am-
ming techniques to provide the hcompos function. The hcompos
function takes the user-speciﬁed cases and autogenerates t he nec-
essary clauses to handle constructors from the input type no t spec-
iﬁed by the programmer, matching them with constructors of t he
output type with the same name.
6. Conclusion
The new Chez Scheme compiler demonstrates that a nanopass com-
piler can perform on par with a more traditionally structure d com-
piler. Despite a more expensive register allocator and the r eplace-
ment of the ﬁve back-end passes of the original 10 passes in th e
compiler with around 50 nanopasses, the new compiler still a v-
erages compile times that are within a factor of two of the ori gi-
nal compiler. The new compiler also generates more efﬁcient code,
showing between a 15% and 26.6% improvement on a set of bench-
marks, depending on the optimize level and the target archit ecture.
The new nanopass framework made it easier to implement the ne w
compiler and will make it easier to maintain and extend in the fu-
ture.
Acknowledgments
Different parts of Keep’s effort on this work were partially sup-
ported by the DARPA programs APAC and CRASH. Comments
from Dan Friedman, Ryan Newton, and the anonymous reviewers
led to several improvements in this papers presentation.
References
[1] O. S. Bagge, K. T. Kalleberg, M. Haveraaen, and E. Visser.
Design of the CodeBoost transformation system for domain-
speciﬁc optimisation of C++ programs. In D. Binkley and
P . Tonella, editors, Proc. 3rd International W orkshop on Source
Code Analysis and Manipulation , SCAM ’03, pages 65–75,
Amsterdam, Sept. 2003. IEEE Computer Society Press. URL
http://www.codeboost.org/papers/codeboost-scam03.pdf.
[2] M. Bravenboer, K. T. Kalleberg, R. V ermaas, and E. Visser . Strat-
ego/XT 0.17. A language and toolset for program transformat ion. Sci-
ence of Computer Programming , 72(1–2):52–70, June 2008. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.scico.2007.11.003.
[3] R. G. Burger, O. Waddell, and R. K. Dybvig. Register alloc ation
using lazy saves, eager restores, and greedy shufﬂing. In Proc. ACM
SIGPLAN 1995 Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation, PLDI ’95, pages 130–138, New Y ork, 1995. ACM.
URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/207110.207125.
[4] W. D. Clinger. Description of benchmarks, 2008. URL
http://www.larcenists.org/benchmarksAboutR6.html.
[5] R. K. Dybvig. Chez Scheme V ersion 8 User’s Guide . Cadence
Research Systems, 2009.
[6] R. K. Dybvig. The Scheme Programming Language. MIT Press, fourth
edition, 2009.
[7] R. K. Dybvig, R. Hieb, and T. Butler. Destination-driven code gener-
ation. Technical Report TR302, Indiana University, Februa ry 1990.
[8] R. K. Dybvig, R. Hieb, and C. Bruggeman. Syntactic abstra ction in
Scheme. LISP and Symbolic Computation , 5(4):295–326, Dec. 1992.
URL http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF01806308.
[9] T. Ekman and G. Hedin. The JastAdd system – modular extens ible
compiler construction. Science of Computer Programming , 69(1-3):
14–26, Dec. 2007. .
[10] N. Frisby, A. Gill, and P . Alexander. A pattern for almos t homomor-
phic functions. In ACM SIGPLAN W orkshop on Generic Program-
ming, 09/2012 2012.
[11] E. Gagnon and L. Hendren. SableCC, an object-oriented c ompiler
framework. In Proc. 26th Conference on Technology of Object-
Oriented Languages, TOOLS ’98, pages 140–154, 1998. .
[12] A. Ghuloum and R. K. Dybvig. Implicit phasing for R6RS li braries.
In Proc. 12th ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Functional
Programming, pages 303–314, New Y ork, 2007. ACM.
[13] A. Ghuloum and R. K. Dybvig. Fixing letrec (reloaded). I n Proc.
2009 W orkshop on Scheme and Functional Programming , Scheme
’09, pages 57–65, 2009.
[14] A. W. Keep. A Nanopass Framework for Commercial Compiler
Development. PhD thesis, Indiana University, Feb. 2013.
6 2013/9/20
=== page 7 ===
[15] A. W. Keep, A. Hearn, and R. K. Dybvig. Optimizing closur es
in O(0) time. In Proc. 2012 W orkshop on Scheme and Functional
Programming, Scheme ’12, 2012.
[16] S. Lerner, T. Millstein, E. Rice, and C. Chambers. Au-
tomated soundness proofs for dataﬂow analyses and transfor -
mations via local rules. In Proc. 32nd ACM SIGACT-
SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages ,
POPL ’05, pages 364–377, New Y ork, 2005. ACM. URL
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1040305.1040335.
[17] E. Meijer, M. M. Fokkinga, and R. Paterson. Functional p ro-
gramming with bananas, lenses, envelopes and barbed wire. I n
Proc. 5th ACM Conference on Functional Programming Lan-
guages and Computer Architecture , pages 124–144, London,
UK, 1991. Springer-V erlag. ISBN 3-540-54396-1. URL
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=645420.652535.
[18] D. Quinlan, M. Schordan, Q. Yi, and B. R. de Supinski. Sem antic-
driven parallelization of loops operating on user-deﬁned c ontainers.
In Lecture Notes in Computer Science , volume 2958/2004 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science , pages 524–538. Springer Berlin / Heidel-
berg, 2004.
[19] C. V . Reeuwijk. Tm: A code generator for recursive data s tructures.
Software: Practice and Experience, 22(10):899–908, Oct. 1992. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/spe.4380221008.
[20] D. Sarkar, O. Waddell, and R. K. Dybvig. A nanopass in-
frastructure for compiler education. In Proc. 9th ACM SIG-
PLAN International Conference on Functional Programming ,
ICFP ’04, pages 201–212, New Y ork, 2004. ACM. URL
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1016850.1016878.
[21] E. R. Scherpelz, S. Lerner, and C. Chambers. Automatic i nference
of optimizer ﬂow functions from semantic meanings. In Proc. 2007
ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and
Implementation, PLDI ’07, pages 135–145, New Y ork, 2007. ACM.
URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1250734.1250750.
[22] O. Waddell and R. K. Dybig. Fast and effective procedure inlining. In
Proc. 4th International Symposium on Static Analysis, SAS ’97, pages
35–52, London, 1997. Springer-V erlag.
[23] O. Waddell and R. K. Dybvig. Extending the scope of syn-
tactic abstraction. In Proc. 26th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT
Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages ,
POPL ’99, pages 203–215, New Y ork, 1999. ACM. URL
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/292540.292559.
[24] O. Waddell, D. Sarkar, and R. K. Dybvig. Fixing letrec: A faithful
yet efﬁcient implementation of Scheme’s recursive binding construct.
Higher-order and Symbolic Computation , 18(3/4):299–326, Decem-
ber 2005.
[25] J. J. Willcock. A Language for Specifying Compiler Optimizations for
Generic Software. Doctoral dissertation, Indiana University, Bloom-
ington, Indiana, USA, Dec. 2008.
[26] Q. Yi, K. Seymour, H. Y ou, R. Vuduc, and D. Quinlan. POET:
Parameterized optimizations for empirical tuning. Techni cal Report
CS-TR-2006-006, University of Texas - San Antonio, 2006. UR L
http://www.cs.utsa.edu/{~}qingyi/papers/poet-lang.pdf.
7 2013/9/20
