Nymble: Blocking Misbehaving Users in
Anonymizing Networks
Patrick P. Tsang, Apu Kapadia, Member, IEEE, Cory Cornelius, and Sean W. Smith
Abstract—Anonymizing networks such as Tor allow users to access Internet services privately by using a series of routers to hide
the client’s IP address from the server. The success of such networks, however, has been limited by users employing this anonymity
for abusive purposes such as defacing popular websites. Website administrators routinely rely on IP-address blocking for disabling
access to misbehaving users, but blocking IP addresses is not practical if the abuser routes through an anonymizing network. As a
result, administrators block all known exit nodes of anonymizing networks, denying anonymous access to misbehaving and behaving
users alike. To address this problem, we present Nymble, a system in which servers can “blacklist” misbehaving users, thereby blocking
users without compromising their anonymity. Our system is thus agnostic to different servers’ definitions of misbehavior — servers can
blacklist users for whatever reason, and the privacy of blacklisted users is maintained.
Index Terms—anonymous blacklisting, privacy, revocation

F

1

I NTRODUCTION

Anonymizing networks such as Tor [18] route traffic through independent nodes in separate administrative domains to hide a client’s IP address. Unfortunately, some users have misused such networks —
under the cover of anonymity, users have repeatedly
defaced popular websites such as Wikipedia. Since website administrators cannot blacklist individual malicious
users’ IP addresses, they blacklist the entire anonymizing network. Such measures eliminate malicious activity
through anonymizing networks at the cost of denying
anonymous access to behaving users. In other words,
a few “bad apples” can spoil the fun for all. (This has
happened repeatedly with Tor.1 )
There are several solutions to this problem, each providing some degree of accountability. In pseudonymous
credential systems [14], [17], [23], [28], users log into
websites using pseudonyms, which can be added to a
blacklist if a user misbehaves. Unfortunately, this approach results in pseudonymity for all users, and weakens
the anonymity provided by the anonymizing network.
Anonymous credential systems [10], [12] employ group
signatures. Basic group signatures [1], [6], [15] allow
servers to revoke a misbehaving user’s anonymity by
This research was supported in part by the NSF, under grant CNS-0524695,
and the Bureau of Justice Assistance, under grant 2005-DD-BX-1091. The
views and conclusions do not necessarily reflect the views of the sponsors.
Nymble first appeared in a PET ’07 paper [24]. This paper presents a
significantly improved construction and a complete rewrite and evaluation of
our (open-source) implementation (see Section 2.7 for a summary of changes).
• Patrick Tsang, Cory Cornelius and Sean Smith are with the Department
of Computer Science, Dartmouth College, Hanover NH, USA.
• Apu Kapadia is with Indiana University Bloomington, IN, USA.
Manuscript received xxxx.
1. The Abuse FAQ for Tor Server Operators lists several such examples
at http://tor.eff.org/faq-abuse.html.en.

complaining to a group manager. Servers must query the
group manager for every authentication, and thus lacks
scalability. Traceable signatures [26] allow the group manager to release a trapdoor that allows all signatures generated by a particular user to be traced; such an approach
does not provide the backward unlinkability [30] that we
desire, where a user’s accesses before the complaint
remain anonymous. Backward unlinkability allows for
what we call subjective blacklisting, where servers can
blacklist users for whatever reason since the privacy of
the blacklisted user is not at risk. In contrast, approaches
without backward unlinkability need to pay careful attention to when and why a user must have all their
connections linked, and users must worry about whether
their behaviors will be judged fairly.
Subjective blacklisting is also better suited to servers
such as Wikipedia, where misbehaviors such as questionable edits to a webpage, are hard to define in mathematical terms. In some systems, misbehavior can indeed
be defined precisely. For instance, double-spending of
an “e-coin” is considered a misbehavior in anonymous
e-cash systems [8], [13], following which the offending user is deanonymized. Unfortunately, such systems
work for only narrow definitions of misbehavior — it is
difficult to map more complex notions of misbehavior
onto “double spending” or related approaches [32].
With dynamic accumulators [11], [31], a revocation operation results in a new accumulator and public parameters for the group, and all other existing users’ credentials
must be updated, making it impractical. Verifier-local revocation (VLR) [2], [7], [9] fixes this shortcoming by requiring the server (“verifier”) to perform only local updates
during revocation. Unfortunately, VLR requires heavy
computation at the server that is linear in the size of the
blacklist. For example, for a blacklist with 1,000 entries,

2

each authentication would take tens of seconds,2 a prohibitive cost in practice. In contrast, our scheme takes the
server about one millisecond per authentication, which is
several thousand times faster than VLR. We believe these
low overheads will incentivize servers to adopt such a
solution when weighed against the potential benefits of
anonymous publishing (e.g., whistle-blowing, reporting,
anonymous tip lines, activism, and so on.).3
1.1

Contributions of this paper

Our research makes the following contributions:
• Blacklisting anonymous users. We provide a means
by which servers can blacklist users of an anonymizing network while maintaining their privacy.
• Practical performance. Our protocol makes use of
inexpensive symmetric cryptographic operations to
significantly outperform the alternatives.
• Open-source implementation. With the goal of contributing a workable system, we have built an opensource implementation of Nymble, which is publicly available.5 We provide performance statistics
to show that our system is indeed practical.
2. In Boneh and Shacham’s construction [7], computation at the
server involves 3 + 2|BL| pairing operations, each of which takes tens
of ms (see benchmarks at http://crypto.stanford.edu/pbc).
3. http://www.torproject.org/torusers.html.en
4. Two nymbles are linked if one can infer that they belong to the
same user with probability better than random guessing.
5. The Nymble Project. http://www.cs.dartmouth.edu/∼nymble.

Nymble
Manager
System Setup

User
Registration

Credential
Acquisition
Tor

Server
Registration

Blacklist
Update
and
Complaining

Nymble Connection

Our solution

We present a secure system called Nymble, which provides all the following properties: anonymous authentication, backward unlinkability, subjective blacklisting,
fast authentication speeds, rate-limited anonymous connections, revocation auditability (where users can verify
whether they have been blacklisted), and also addresses
the Sybil attack [19] to make its deployment practical.
In Nymble, users acquire an ordered collection of
nymbles, a special type of pseudonym, to connect to
websites. Without additional information, these nymbles
are computationally hard to link,4 and hence using the
stream of nymbles simulates anonymous access to services. Websites, however, can blacklist users by obtaining
a seed for a particular nymble, allowing them to link
future nymbles from the same user — those used before
the complaint remain unlinkable. Servers can therefore
blacklist anonymous users without knowledge of their
IP addresses while allowing behaving users to connect
anonymously. Our system ensures that users are aware
of their blacklist status before they present a nymble,
and disconnect immediately if they are blacklisted. Although our work applies to anonymizing networks in
general, we consider Tor for purposes of exposition. In
fact, any number of anonymizing networks can rely on
the same Nymble system, blacklisting anonymous users
regardless of their anonymizing network(s) of choice.
1.2

Pseudonym
Manager

User

Server

Fig. 1. The Nymble system architecture showing the
various modes of interaction. Note that users interact with
the NM and servers though the anonymizing network.
Some of the authors of this paper have published
two anonymous authentication schemes, BLAC [33] and
PEREA [34], which eliminate the need for a trusted
third party for revoking users. While BLAC and PEREA
provide better privacy by eliminating the TTP, Nymble
provides authentication rates that are several orders of
magnitude faster than BLAC and PEREA (see Section 6).
Nymble thus represents a practical solution for blocking
misbehaving users of anonymizing networks.
We note that an extended version of this article is
available as a technical report [16].

2

A N OVERVIEW TO N YMBLE

We now present a high-level overview of the Nymble
system, and defer the entire protocol description and
security analysis to subsequent sections.
2.1

Resource-based blocking

To limit the number of identities a user can obtain (called
the Sybil attack [19]), the Nymble system binds nymbles
to resources that are sufficiently difficult to obtain in
great numbers. For example, we have used IP addresses
as the resource in our implementation, but our scheme
generalizes to other resources such as email addresses,
identity certificates, and trusted hardware. We address
the practical issues related with resource-based blocking
in Section 8, and suggest other alternatives for resources.
We do not claim to solve the Sybil attack. This problem
is faced by any credential system [19], [27], and we suggest
some promising approaches based on resource-based
blocking since we aim to create a real-world deployment.
2.2

The Pseudonym Manager

The user must first contact the Pseudonym Manager (PM)
and demonstrate control over a resource; for IP-address
blocking, the user must connect to the PM directly (i.e.,
not through a known anonymizing network), as shown
in Figure 1. We assume the PM has knowledge about

3

Tor routers, for example, and can ensure that users are
communicating with it directly.6 Pseudonyms are deterministically chosen based on the controlled resource,
ensuring that the same pseudonym is always issued for
the same resource.
Note that the user does not disclose what server he
or she intends to connect to, and the PM’s duties are
limited to mapping IP addresses (or other resources) to
pseudonyms. As we will explain, the user contacts the
PM only once per linkability window (e.g., once a day).
2.3 The Nymble Manager
After obtaining a pseudonym from the PM, the user
connects to the Nymble Manager (NM) through the
anonymizing network, and requests nymbles for access
to a particular server (such as Wikipedia). A user’s
requests to the NM are therefore pseudonymous, and
nymbles are generated using the user’s pseudonym and
the server’s identity. These nymbles are thus specific to
a particular user-server pair. Nevertheless, as long as the
PM and the NM do not collude, the Nymble system
cannot identify which user is connecting to what server;
the NM knows only the pseudonym-server pair, and the
PM knows only the user identity-pseudonym pair.
To provide the requisite cryptographic protection and
security properties, the NM encapsulates nymbles within
nymble tickets. Servers wrap seeds into linking tokens and
therefore we will speak of linking tokens being used
to link future nymble tickets. The importance of these
constructs will become apparent as we proceed.
2.4 Time
Nymble tickets are bound to specific time periods. As
illustrated in Figure 2, time is divided into linkability
windows of duration W, each of which is split into L
time periods of duration T (i.e., W = L∗T ). We will refer
to time periods and linkability windows chronologically
as t1 , t2 , . . . , tL and w1 , w2 , . . . respectively. While a user’s
access within a time period is tied to a single nymble
ticket, the use of different nymble tickets across time
periods grants the user anonymity between time periods.
Smaller time periods provide users with higher rates
of anonymous authentication, while longer time periods
allow servers to rate-limit the number of misbehaviors
from a particular user before he or she is blocked. For
example, T could be set to 5 minutes, and W to 1 day
(and thus L = 288). The linkability window allows for
dynamism since resources such as IP addresses can get reassigned and it is undesirable to blacklist such resources
indefinitely, and it ensures forgiveness of misbehavior
after a certain period of time. We assume all entities
are time synchronized (for example, with time.nist.gov
via the Network Time Protocol (NTP)), and can thus
calculate the current linkability window and time period.
6. Note that if a user connects through an unknown anonymizing
network or proxy, the security of our system is no worse than that
provided by real IP-address blocking, where the user could have used
an anonymizing network unknown to the server.

Misbehavior

Complaint

time

... tL

t1 ... t* ... tc ... tL
w*

Previous connections remain
anonymous and unlinkable

t1 ...

Future
Connections
connections anonymous
become and unlinkable
linkable
once again

Fig. 2. The life cycle of a misbehaving user. If the server
complains in time period tc about a user’s connection in
t∗ , the user becomes linkable starting in tc . The complaint
in tc can include nymble tickets from only tc−1 and earlier.
2.5

Blacklisting a user

If a user misbehaves, the server may link any future
connection from this user within the current linkability
window (e.g., the same day). Consider Figure 2 as an
example: A user connects and misbehaves at a server
during time period t∗ within linkability window w∗ . The
server later detects this misbehavior and complains to
the NM in time period tc (t∗ < tc ≤ tL ) of the same
linkability window w∗ . As part of the complaint, the
server presents the nymble ticket of the misbehaving
user and obtains the corresponding seed from the NM.
The server is then able to link future connections by
the user in time periods tc , tc + 1, . . . , tL of the same
linkability window w∗ to the complaint. Therefore, once
the server has complained about a user, that user is
blacklisted for the rest of the day, for example (the
linkability window). Note that the user’s connections
in t1 , t2 , . . . , t∗ , t∗ + 1, . . . , tc remain unlinkable (i.e., including those since the misbehavior and until the time
of complaint). Even though misbehaving users can be
blocked from making connections in the future, the
users’ past connections remain unlinkable, thus providing backward unlinkability and subjective blacklisting.
2.6

Notifying the user of blacklist status

Users who make use of anonymizing networks expect
their connections to be anonymous. If a server obtains
a seed for that user, however, it can link that user’s
subsequent connections. It is of utmost importance, then,
that users be notified of their blacklist status before they
present a nymble ticket to a server. In our system, the
user can download the server’s blacklist and verify her
status. If blacklisted, the user disconnects immediately.
Since the blacklist is cryptographically signed by the
NM, the authenticity of the blacklist is easily verified
if the blacklist was updated in the current time period
(only one update to the blacklist per time period is
allowed). If the blacklist has not been updated in the current time period, the NM provides servers with “daisies”
every time period so that users can verify the freshness

4

of the blacklist (“blacklist from time period told is fresh
as of time period tnow ”). As discussed in Section 4.3.4,
these daisies are elements of a hash chain, and provide
a lightweight alternative to digital signatures. Using
digital signatures and daisies, we thus ensure that race
conditions are not possible in verifying the freshness of
a blacklist. A user is guaranteed that he or she will not
be linked if the user verifies the integrity and freshness
of the blacklist before sending his or her nymble ticket.
2.7

Summary of updates to the Nymble protocol

We highlight the changes to Nymble since our conference paper [24]. Previously, we had proved only the
privacy properties associated with nymbles as part of
a two-tiered hash chain. Here we prove security at the
protocol level. This process gave us insights into possible
(subtle) attacks against privacy, leading us to redesign
our protocols and refine our definitions of privacy. For
example, users are now either legitimate or illegitimate,
and are anonymous within these sets (see Section 3). This
redefinition affects how a user establishes a “Nymble
connection” (see Section 5.5), and now prevents the
server from distinguishing between users who have
already connected in the same time period and those
who are blacklisted, resulting in larger anonymity sets.
A thorough protocol redesign has also resulted in several optimizations. We have eliminated blacklist version
numbers and users do not need to repeatedly obtain the
current version number from the NM. Instead servers
obtain proofs of freshness every time period, and users
directly verify the freshness of blacklists upon download. Based on a hash-chain approach, the NM issues
lightweight daisies to servers as proof of a blacklist’s
freshness, thus making blacklist updates highly efficient.
Also, instead of embedding seeds, on which users must
perform computation to verify their blacklist status, the
NM now embeds a unique identifier nymble ∗ , which the
user can directly recognize. Lastly, we have compacted
several datastructures, especially the servers’ blacklists,
which are downloaded by users in each connection, and
report on the various sizes in detail in Section 6. We also
report on our open-source implementation of Nymble,
completely rewritten as a C library for efficiency.

3

S ECURITY M ODEL

Nymble aims for four security goals. We provide informal definitions here; a detailed formalism can be found
in our technical report [16], which explains how these
goals must also resist coalition attacks.
3.1

Goals and threats

An entity is honest when its operations abide by the
system’s specification. An honest entity can be curious:
it attempts to infer knowledge from its own information
(e.g., its secrets, state, and protocol communications). An
honest entity becomes corrupt when it is compromised

by an attacker, and hence reveals its information at the
time of compromise, and operates under the attacker’s
full control, possibly deviating from the specification.
Blacklistability assures that any honest server can
indeed block misbehaving users. Specifically, if an honest
server complains about a user that misbehaved in the
current linkability window, the complaint will be successful and the user will not be able to “nymble-connect,”
i.e., establish a Nymble-authenticated connection, to the
server successfully in subsequent time periods (following the time of complaint) of that linkability window.
Rate-limiting assures any honest server that no user
can successfully nymble-connect to it more than once
within any single time period.
Non-frameability guarantees that any honest user
who is legitimate according to an honest server can
nymble-connect to that server. This prevents an attacker
from framing a legitimate honest user, e.g., by getting
the user blacklisted for someone else’s misbehavior. This
property assumes each user has a single unique identity.
When IP addresses are used as the identity, it is possible
for a user to “frame” an honest user who later obtains
the same IP address. Non-frameability holds true only
against attackers with different identities (IP addresses).
A user is legitimate according to a server if she has not
been blacklisted by the server, and has not exceeded the
rate limit of establishing Nymble-connections. Honest
servers must be able to differentiate between legitimate
and illegitimate users.
Anonymity protects the anonymity of honest users,
regardless of their legitimacy according to the (possibly
corrupt) server; the server cannot learn any more information beyond whether the user behind (an attempt to
make) a nymble-connection is legitimate or illegitimate.
3.2

Trust assumptions

We allow the servers and the users to be corrupt and
controlled by an attacker. Not trusting these entities is
important because encountering a corrupt server and/or
user is a realistic threat. Nymble must still attain its goals
under such circumstances. With regard to the PM and
NM, Nymble makes several assumptions on who trusts
whom to be how for what guarantee. We summarize these
trust assumptions as a matrix in Figure 3. Should a trust
assumption become invalid, Nymble will not be able to
provide the corresponding guarantee.
For example, a corrupt PM or NM can violate Blacklistability by issuing different pseudonyms or credentials
to blacklisted users. A dishonest PM (resp. NM) can
frame a user by issuing her the pseudonym (resp. credential) of another user who has already been blacklisted.
To undermine the Anonymity of a user, a dishonest PM
(resp. NM) can first impersonate the user by cloning
her pseudonym (resp. credential) and then attempt to
authenticate to a server—a successful attempt reveals
that the user has already made a connection to the
server during the time period. Moreover, by studying the

5

Who

Whom

How

What

Servers

PM & NM

honest

Users
Users
Users

PM & NM
PM
NM

Users

PM or NM

honest
honest
honest &
not curious
honest

Blacklistability
& Rate-limiting
Non-frameability
Anonymity
Anonymity
Non-identification

Fig. 3. Who trusts whom to be how for what guarantee.

complaint log, a curious NM can deduce that a user has
connected more than once if she has been complained
about two or more times. As already described in Section 2.3, the user must trust that at least the NM or PM is
honest to keep the user and server identity pair private.

4

P RELIMINARIES

4.1

Notation

The notation a ∈R S represents an element drawn
uniformly at random from non-empty set S. N0 is the
set of non-negative integers, and N is the set N0 \{0}.
s[i] is the i-th element of list s. s||t is the concatenation
of (the unambiguous encoding of) lists s and t. The
empty list is denoted by ∅. We sometimes treat lists
of tuples as dictionaries. For example, if L is the list
((Alice, 1234), (Bob, 5678)), then L[Bob] denotes the tuple
(Bob, 5678). If A is a (possibly probabilistic) algorithm,
then A(x) denotes the output when A is executed given
the input x. a := b means that b is assigned to a.
4.2

Cryptographic primitives

Nymble uses the following building blocks (concrete
instantiations are suggested in Section 6):
• Secure cryptographic hash functions. These are oneway and collision-resistant functions that resemble
random oracles [5]. Denote the range of the hash
functions by H.
• Secure message authentication (MA) [3]. These consist of the key generation (MA.KeyGen), and the
message authentication code (MAC) computation
(MA.Mac) algorithms. Denote the domain of MACs
by M.
• Secure symmetric-key encryption (Enc) [4]. These consist of the key generation (Enc.KeyGen), encryption
(Enc.Encrypt), and decryption (Enc.Decrypt) algorithms. Denote the domain of ciphertexts by Γ.
• Secure digital signatures (Sig) [22]. These consist of
the key generation (Sig.KeyGen), signing (Sig.Sign),
and verification (Sig.Verify) algorithms. Denote the
domain of signatures by Σ.
4.3

Data structures

Nymble uses several important data structures:

Algorithm 1 PMCreatePseudonym
Input: (uid , w ) ∈ H × N
Persistent state: pmState ∈ SP
Output: pnym ∈ P
1: Extract nymKey P , macKey NP from pmState
2: nym := MA.Mac(uid ||w , nymKey P )
3: mac := MA.Mac(nym||w , macKey NP )
4: return pnym := (nym, mac)
Algorithm 2 NMVerifyPseudonym
Input: (pnym, w ) ∈ P × N
Persistent state: nmState ∈ SN
Output: b ∈ {true, false}
1: Extract macKey NP from nmState
2: (nym, mac) := pnym
?
3: return mac = MA.Mac(nym||w , macKey NP )

4.3.1

Pseudonyms

The PM issues pseudonyms to users. A pseudonym
pnym has two components nym and mac: nym is a
pseudo-random mapping of the user’s identity (e.g.,
IP address),7 the linkability window w for which the
pseudonym is valid, and the PM’s secret key nymKey P ;
mac is a MAC that the NM uses to verify the integrity
of the pseudonym. Algorithms 1 and 2 describe the
procedures of creating and verifying pseudonyms.
4.3.2

Seeds and nymbles

A nymble is a pseudo-random number, which serves as
an identifier for a particular time period. Nymbles (presented by a user) across periods are unlinkable unless a
server has blacklisted that user. Nymbles are presented
as part of a nymble ticket, as described next.
As shown in Figure 4, seeds evolve throughout a
linkability window using a seed-evolution function f ; the
seed for the next time period (seed next ) is computed from
the seed for the current time period (seed cur ) as
seed next = f (seed cur ).
The nymble (nymble t ) for a time period t is evaluated
by applying the nymble-evaluation function g to its corresponding seed (seed t ), i.e.,
nymble t = g(seed t ).
The NM sets seed 0 to a pseudo-random mapping
of the user’s pseudonym pnym, the (encoded) identity
sid of the server (e.g., domain name), the linkability
window w for which the seed is valid, and the NM’s
secret key seedKey N . Seeds are therefore specific to userserver-window combinations. As a consequence, a seed
is useful only for a particular server to link a particular
user during a particular linkability window.
7. In Nymble, identities (users’ and servers’) are encoded into a
fixed-length string using a cryptographic hash function.

6

seed0

f

seed1

f

seed2

g

g

g

nymble*

nymble1

nymble2

f

...

f

seedL

g
...

nymbleL

Fig. 4. Evolution of seeds and nymbles. Given seed i it
is easy to compute nymble i , nymble i+1 , . . . , nymble L , but
not nymble ∗ , nymble 1 , . . . , nymble i−1 .
In our Nymble construction, f and g are two distinct
cryptographic hash functions. Hence, it is easy to compute future nymbles starting from a particular seed by
applying f and g appropriately, but infeasible to compute nymbles otherwise. Without a seed, the sequence
of nymbles appears unlinkable, and honest users can
enjoy anonymity. Even when a seed for a particular time
period is obtained, all the nymbles prior to that time
period remain unlinkable.
4.3.3 Nymble tickets and credentials
A credential contains all the nymble tickets for a particular linkability window that a user can present to
a particular server. Algorithm 3 describes the following procedure of generating a credential upon request.
A ticket contains a nymble specific to a server, time
period, and linkability window. ctxt is encrypted data
that the NM can use during a complaint involving the
nymble ticket. In particular, ctxt contains the first nymble
(nymble ∗ ) in the user’s sequence of nymbles, and the
seed used to generate that nymble. Upon a complaint,
the NM extracts the user’s seed and issues it to the server
by evolving the seed, and nymble ∗ helps the NM to
recognize whether the user has already been blacklisted.
The MACs mac N and mac NS are used by the NM
and the server respectively to verify the integrity of the
nymble ticket as described in Algorithms 4 and 5. As
will be explained later, the NM will need to verify the
ticket’s integrity upon a complaint from the server.
4.3.4 Blacklists
A server’s blacklist is a list of nymble ∗ ’s corresponding
to all the nymbles that the server has complained about.
Users can quickly check their blacklisting status at a
server by checking to see whether their nymble ∗ appears
in the server’s blacklist (see Algorithm 6).
Blacklist integrity It is important for users to be able
to check the integrity and freshness of blacklists, because
otherwise servers could omit entries or present older
blacklists and link users without their knowledge. The
NM signs the blacklist (see Algorithm 7), along with the
server identity sid , the current time period t, current
linkability window w, and target (used for freshness,
explained soon), using its signing key signKey N . As will
be explained later, during a complaint procedure, the
NM needs to update the server’s blacklist, and thus

Algorithm 3 NMCreateCredential
Input: (pnym, sid , w ) ∈ P × H × N
Persistent state: nmState ∈ SN
Output: cred ∈ D
1: Extract
macKey NS , macKey N , seedKey N , encKey N
from keys in nmState
2: seed 0 := f (Mac(pnym||sid ||w , seedKey N ))
∗
3: nymble := g(seed 0 )
4: for t from 1 to L do
5:
seed t := f (seed t−1 )
6:
nymble t := g(seed t )
7:
ctxt t := Enc.Encrypt(nymble ∗ ||seed t , encKey N )
8:
ticket 0t := sid ||t||w ||nymble t ||ctxt t
9:
mac N,t := MA.Mac(ticket 0t , macKey N )
10:
mac NS ,t := MA.Mac(ticket 0t ||mac N,t , macKey NS )
11:
tickets[t] := (t, nymble t , ctxt t , mac N,t , mac NS ,t )
∗
12: return cred := (nymble , tickets)
Algorithm 4 NMVerifyTicket
Input: (sid , t, w , ticket) ∈ H × N2 × T
Persistent state: svrState
Output: b ∈ {true, false}
1: Extract macKey N from keys in nmState
2: (·, nymble, ctxt, mac N , mac NS ) := ticket
3: content := sid ||t||w ||nymble||ctxt
?
4: return mac N = MA.Mac(content, macKey N )

needs to check the integrity of the blacklist presented
by the server. To make this operation more efficient, the
NM also generates a MAC using its secret key macKey N
(line 3). At the end of the signing procedure, the NM
returns a blacklist certificate (line 6), which contains
the time period for which the certificate was issued, a
daisy (used for freshness, explained soon), mac and sig.
Algorithms 8 and 9 describe how users and the NM can
verify the integrity and freshness of blacklists.
Blacklist freshness If the NM has signed the blacklist
for the current time period, users can simply verify
the digital signature in the certificate to infer that the
blacklist is both valid (not tampered with) and fresh
(since the current time period matches the time period
in the blacklist certificate). To prove the freshness of
blacklists every time period, however, the servers would
need to get the blacklists digitally signed every time
period, thus imposing a high load on the NM. To speed
up this process, we use a hash chain [20], [29] to certify
that “blacklist from time period t is still fresh.”
For each complaint, the NM generates a new random
seed daisy L for a hash chain corresponding to time
period L. It then computes daisy L−1 , daisy L−2 , . . . , daisy t
up to current time period t by successively hashing the
previous daisy to generate the next with a cryptographic
hash function h. For example, daisy 5 = h(daisy 6 ).
As outlined later (in Algorithm 13), target is set to
daisy t . Now, until the next update to the blacklist, the

7

Algorithm 5 ServerVerifyTicket
target

h

daisy1

h

daisy2

h

...

h

daisyL

Input: (t, w , ticket) ∈ N2 × T
Persistent state: svrState
Output: b ∈ {true, false}
1: Extract sid , macKey NS from svrState
2: (·, nymble, ctxt, mac N , mac NS ) := ticket
3: content := sid ||t||w ||nymble||ctxt||mac N
?
4: return mac NS = MA.Mac(content, macKey NS )

Fig. 5. Given daisy i it is easy to verify the freshness of
the blacklist by applying h i times to obtain target. Only
the NM can compute the next daisy i+1 in the chain.

Algorithm 6 UserCheckIfBlacklisted
Input: (sid , blist) ∈ H × Bn , n, ` ∈ N0
Persistent state: usrState ∈ SU
Output: b ∈ {true, false}
∗
1: Extract nymble
from cred in usrEntries[sid ] in
usrState
∗ ?
2: return (nymble ∈ blist)

Input: (sid , t, w , target, blist) ∈ H × N2 × H × Bn , n ∈ N0
Persistent state: nmState ∈ SN
Output: cert ∈ C
1: Extract macKey N , signKey N from keys in nmState
2: content := sid ||t||w ||target||blist
3: mac := MA.Mac(content, macKey N )
4: sig := Sig.Sign(content, signKey N )
5: daisy := target
6: return cert := (t, daisy, t, mac, sig)

NM need only release daisies for the current time period
instead of digitally signing the blacklist. Given a certificate from an older time period and daisy t for current
time period t, users can verify the integrity and freshness
of the blacklist by computing the target from daisy t .
4.3.5 Complaints and linking tokens
A server complains to the NM about a misbehaving user
by submitting the user’s nymble ticket that was used in
the offending connection. The NM returns a seed, from
which the server creates a linking token, which contains
the seed and the corresponding nymble.
Each server maintains a list of linking tokens in a
linking-list, and updates each token on the list every time
period. When a user presents a nymble ticket, the server
checks the nymble within the ticket against the nymbles
in the linking-list entries. A match indicates that the user
has been blacklisted.
4.4

Algorithm 7 NMSignBL

5

O UR N YMBLE C ONSTRUCTION

5.1

System setup

During setup, the NM and the PM interact as follows.
1) The NM executes NMInitState() (see Algorithm 10) and initializes its state nmState to the
algorithm’s output.
2) The NM extracts macKey NP from nmState and
sends it to the PM over a type-Auth channel.
macKey NP is a shared secret between the NM and
the PM, so that the NM can verify the authenticity
of pseudonyms issued by the PM.
3) The PM generates nymKey P by running
Mac.KeyGen() and initializes its state pmState to
the pair (nymKey P , macKey NP ).
4) The NM publishes verKey N in nmState in a way
that the users in Nymble can obtain it and verify
its integrity at any time (e.g., during registration).

Communication channels

Nymble utilizes three types of communication channels,
namely type-Basic, -Auth and -Anon (Figure 6).
We assume that a public-key infrastructure (PKI) such
as X.509 is in place, and that the NM, the PM and all the
servers in Nymble have obtained a PKI credential from
a well-established and trustworthy CA. (We stress that
the users in Nymble, however, need not possess a PKI
credential.) These entities can thus realize type-Basic and
type-Auth channels to one another by setting up a TLS8
connection using their PKI credentials.
All users can realize type-Basic channels to the NM, the
PM and any server, again by setting up a TLS connection.
Additionally, by setting up a TLS connection over the
Tor anonymizing network,9 users can realize a type-Anon
channel to the NM and any server.
8. The Transport Layer Security Protocol Version 1.2. IETF RFC 5246.
9. While we acknowledge the existence of attacks on Tor’s
anonymity, we assume Tor provides perfect anonymity [21] for the
sake of arguing Nymble’s own anonymity guarantee.

5.2

Server registration

To participate in the Nymble system, a server with
identity sid initiates a type-Auth channel to the NM, and
registers with the NM according to the Server Registration
protocol below. Each server may register at most once in
any linkability window.
1) The NM makes sure that the server has not already
registered: If (sid , ·, ·) ∈ nmEntries in its nmState,
it terminates with failure; it proceeds otherwise.
2) The NM reads the current time period and linkability window as tnow and wnow respectively, and then
obtains a svrState by running (see Algorithm 11)
NMRegisterServernmState (sid , tnow , wnow ).
3) The NM appends svrState to its nmState, sends it
to the Server, and terminates with success.
4) The server, on receiving svrState, records it as its
state, and terminates with success.

8

Algorithm 8 VerifyBL

Type

Initiator

Responder

Link

Input: (sid , t, w , blist, cert) ∈ H × N2 × Bn × C, n ∈ N0
Output: b ∈ {true, false}
1: (td , daisy, ts , mac, sig) := cert
2: if td 6= t ∨ td < ts then
3:
return false
4: target := h(td −ts ) (daisy)
5: content := sid ||ts ||w ||target||blist
6: return Sig.Verify(content, sig, verKey N )

Basic
Auth
Anon

–
Authenticated
Anonymous

Authenticated
Authenticated
Authenticated

Confidential
Confidential
Confidential

Algorithm 9 NMVerifyBL
Input: (sid , t, w , blist, cert) ∈ H × N2 × Bn × C, n ∈ N0
Persistent state: nmState ∈ SN
Output: b ∈ {true, false}
1-6: Same as lines 1–6 in VerifyBL
7: Extract macKey N from keys in nmState
?
8: return mac = MA.Mac(content, macKey N )

In svrState, macKey NS is a key shared between the
NM and the server for verifying the authenticity of
nymble tickets; time lastUpd indicates the time period
when the blacklist was last updated, which is initialized
to tnow , the current time period at registration.
5.3

User registration

A user with identity uid must register with the PM
once each linkability window. To do so, the user initiates
a type-Basic channel to the PM, followed by the User
Registration protocol described below.
1) The PM checks if the user is allowed to register. In
our current implementation the PM infers the registering user’s IP address from the communication
channel, and makes sure that the IP address does
not belong to a known Tor exit node. If this is not
the case, the PM terminates with failure.
2) Otherwise, the PM reads the current linkability
window as wnow , and runs
pnym := PMCreatePseudonympmState (uid , wnow ).
The PM then gives pnym to the user, and terminates
with success.
3) The user, on receiving pnym, sets her state usrState
to (pnym, ∅), and terminates with success.
5.4

Credential acquisition

To establish a Nymble-connection to a server, a user
must provide a valid ticket, which is acquired as part
of a credential from the NM. To acquire a credential
for server sid during the current linkability window, a
registered user initiates a type-Anon channel to the NM,
followed by the Credential Acquisition protocol below.
1) The user extracts pnym from usrState and sends
the pair (pnym, sid ) to the NM.

Fig. 6. Different types of channels utilized in Nymble.
Algorithm 10 NMInitState
Output: nmState ∈ SN
1: macKey NP := Mac.KeyGen()
2: macKey N := Mac.KeyGen()
3: seedKey N := Mac.KeyGen()
4: (encKey N , decKey N ) := Enc.KeyGen()
5: (signKey N , verKey N ) := Sig.KeyGen()
6: keys := (macKey NP , macKey N , seedKey N ,
7:
encKey N , decKey N , signKey N , verKey N )
8: nmEntries := ∅
9: return nmState := (keys, nmEntries)

2) The NM reads the current linkability window as
wnow . It makes sure the user’s pnym is valid: If
NMVerifyPseudonymnmState (pnym, wnow )
returns false, the NM terminates with failure; it
proceeds otherwise.
3) The NM runs
NMCreateCredentialnmState (pnym, sid , wnow ),
which returns a credential cred . The NM sends cred
to the user and terminates with success.
4) The user, on receiving cred , creates usrEntry :=
(sid , cred , false), appends it to its state usrState,
and terminates with success.

5.5

Nymble-connection establishment

To establish a connection to a server sid , the user initiates
a type-Anon channel to the server, followed by the
Nymble-connection establishment protocol described below.
5.5.1

Blacklist validation

1) The server sends hblist, certi to the user, where blist
is its blacklist for the current time period and cert
is the certificate on blist. (We will describe how the
server can update its blacklist soon.)
2) The user reads the current time period and linka(U )
(U )
bility window as tnow and wnow and assumes these
values to be current for the rest of the protocol.
3) For freshness and integrity the user checks if
(U )
(U )
VerifyBLusrState (sid , tnow
, wnow
, blist, cert) = true.

If not, she terminates the protocol with failure.

9

Algorithm 11 NMRegisterServer
2

Input: (sid , t, w ) ∈ H × N
Persistent state: nmState ∈ SN
Output: svrState ∈ SS
1: (keys, nmEntries) := nmState
2: macKey NS := Mac.KeyGen()
3: daisy L ∈R H
0
4: nmEntries := nmEntries||(sid , macKey NS , daisy L , t)
0
5: nmState := (keys, nmEntries )
(L−t+1)
6: target := h
(daisy L )
7: blist := ∅
8: cert := NMSignBLnmState (sid , t, w , target, blist)
9: svrState := (sid , macKey NS , blist, cert, ∅, ∅, ∅, t)
10: return svrState

Algorithm 12 ServerLinkTicket
Input: ticket ∈ T
Persistent state: svrState ∈ SS
Output: b ∈ {true, false}
1: Extract lnkng-tokens from svrState
2: (·, nymble, · · · ) := ticket
3: for all i = 1 to |lnkng-tokens| do
4:
if (·, nymble) = lnkng-tokens[i] then
5:
return true
6: return false

•

ticket is not linked (in other words, the user
has not been blacklisted), i.e.,
ServerLinkTicketsvrState (ticket) = false.

5.5.2

Privacy check

Since multiple connection-establishment attempts by a
user to the same server within the same time period
can be linkable, the user keeps track of whether she has
already disclosed a ticket to the server in the current time
period by maintaining a boolean variable ticketDisclosed
for the server in her state.
Furthermore, since a user who has been blacklisted by
a server can have her connection-establishment attempts
linked to her past establishment, the user must make
sure that she has not been blacklisted thus far.
Consequently, if ticketDisclosed in usrEntries[sid ] in
the user’s usrState is true, or
UserCheckIfBlacklistedusrState (sid , blist) = true,
then it is unsafe for the user to proceed and the user sets
safe to false and terminates the protocol with failure.10
5.5.3

Ticket examination

1) The user sets ticketDisclosed in usrEntries[sid ]
in usrState to true. She then sends hticketi to
(U )
the server, where ticket is ticket[tnow ] in cred in
usrEntries[sid ] in usrState.
Note that the user discloses ticket for time period
(U )
(U )
tnow after verifying blist’s freshness for tnow . This
procedure avoids the situation in which the user
verifies the current blacklist just before a time
period ends, and then presents a newer ticket for
the next time period.
2) On receiving hticketi, the server reads the current
(S)
time period and linkability window as tnow and
(S)
wnow respectively. The server then checks that:
• ticket is fresh, i.e., ticket 6∈ slist in server’s state.
(S)
(S)
• ticket is valid, i.e., on input (tnow , wnow , ticket),
the algorithm ServerVerifyTicket returns
true. (See Algorithm 5.)
10. We note that a nymble-authenticated session may be long-lived,
where actions within the session are linkable. It is the establishment
of multiple sessions within a time period that is disallowed.

(See Algorithm 12.)
3) If any of the checks above fails, the server sends
hgoodbyei to the user and terminates with failure.
Otherwise, it adds ticket to slist in its state, sends
hokayi to the user and terminates with success.
4) On receiving hokayi, the user terminates in success.
5.6

Service provision and access logging

If both the user and the server terminate with success in
the Nymble-connection Establishment described above, the
server may start serving the user over the same channel.
The server records ticket and logs the access during the
session for a potential complaint in the future.
5.7

Auditing and filing for complaints

If at some later time the server desires to blacklist the
user behind a Nymble-connection, during the establishment of which the server collected ticket from the
user, the server files a complaint by appending ticket to
cmplnt-tickets in its svrState.
Filed complaints are batched up. They are processed
during the next blacklist update (to be described next).
5.8

Blacklist update

Servers update their blacklists for the current time period
for two purposes. First, as mentioned earlier, the server
needs to provide the user with its blacklist (and blacklist
certificate) for the current time period during a Nymbleconnection establishment. Second, the server needs to be
able to blacklist the misbehaving users by processing the
newly filed complaints (since last update).
The procedure for updating blacklists (and their certificates) differs depending on whether complaints are
involved. When there is no complaint (i.e., the server’s
cmplnt-tickets is empty), blacklists stay unchanged; the
certificates need only a “light refreshment.” When there
are complaints, on the other hand, new entries are added
to the blacklists and certificates need to be regenerated.
Since these updates are certified for integrity and freshness at the granularity of time periods, multiple updates

10

within a single time period are disallowed (otherwise
servers could send users stale blacklists).
Our current implementation employs “lazy” update:
the server updates its blacklist upon its first Nymbleconnection establishment request in a time period.
5.8.1 Without complaints
1) The server with identity sid initiates a type-Auth
channel to the NM, and sends a request to the NM
for a blacklist update.
2) The NM reads the current time period as tnow . It
extracts tlastUpd and daisy L from nmEntry for sid in
nmState. If tlastUpd is tnow , the server has already
updated its blacklist for the current time period,
and the NM terminates the protocol as failure.
3) Otherwise, the NM updates tlastUpd to tnow . It
computes daisy 0 := h(L−tnow +1) (daisy L ) and sends
(tnow , daisy 0 ) to the server.
4) The server replaces td and daisy in cert in blist in
its svrState with tnow and daisy 0 respectively.
5.8.2 With complaints
1) The server with identity sid initiates a
type-Auth channel to the NM and sends
(blist, cert, cmplnt-tickets) from its svrState as
a blacklist update request.
(N )
2) The NM reads the current time period as tnow . It
runs
NMHandleComplaintsnmState
on input (sid , tnow , wnow , blist, cert, cmplnt-tickets).
(See Algorithm 15.) If the algorithm returns ⊥, the
NM considers the update request invalid, in which
case the NM terminates the protocol as failure.
3) Otherwise, the NM relays the algorithm’s output
(blist 0 , cert 0 , seeds), to the server.
4) The server updates its state svrState as follows.
It replaces blist and cert with blist||blist 0 and
cert 0 respectively, and sets cmplnt-tkts to ∅. For
each seed ∈ seeds, the server creates a token as
(seed , g(seed )) and appends it to lnkng-tokens. Finally, the server terminates with success.
We now explain what NMHandleComplaints does.
The algorithm first checks the integrity and freshness of
the blacklist (lines 2–6) and that the NM hasn’t already
updated the server’s blacklist for the current time period.
It then checks if all complaints are valid for some previous time period during the current linkability window
(lines 7–12). Finally, the algorithm prepares an answer to
the update request by invoking NMComputeBLUpdate
and NMComputeSeeds (see Algorithm 14) (lines 13–16).
NMComputeBLUpdate (see Algorithm 13) creates new
entries to be appended to the server’s blacklist. Each
entry is either the actual nymble ∗ of the user being
complained about if the user has not been blacklisted
already, or a random nymble otherwise. This way, the
server cannot learn if two complaints are about the same
user, and thus cannot link the Nymble-connections to the

Algorithm 13 NMComputeBLUpdate
Input: (sid , t, w , blist, cmplnt-tickets) ∈ H×N2 ×Bn ×T m
Persistent state: nmState ∈ SN
Output: (blist 0 , cert 0 ) ∈ Bm × C
1: (keys,
nmEntries) := nmState


·, macKey N , seedKey N ,
2:
:= keys
encKey N , ·, signKey N , ·
3: for i = 1 to m do
4:
(·, ·, ctxt, ·, ·) := cmplnt-tickets[i]
5:
nymble ∗ ||seed := Decrypt(ctxt, decKey N )
6:
if nymble ∗ ∈ blist then
7:
blist 0 [i] ∈R H
8:
else
9:
blist 0 [i] := nymble ∗
0
10: daisy L ∈R H
0
11: target 0 := h(L−t+1) (daisy L )
0
0
12: cert := NMSignBL(sid , t, w , target 0 , blist||blist )
13: Replace daisy L and tlastUpd in nmEntries[sid ] in
nmState with daisy 0L and by t respectively
0
14: return (blist , cert 0 )
Algorithm 14 NMComputeSeeds
Input: (t, blist, cmplnt-tickets) ∈ N × Bn × T m
Persistent state: nmState ∈ SN
Output: seeds ∈ Hm
1: Extract decKey N from keys in nmState
2: for all i = 1 to m do
3:
(t 0 , nymble, ctxt, · · · ) := cmplnt-tickets[i]
4:
nymble ∗ ||seed := Enc.Decrypt(ctxt, decKey N )
5:
if nymble ∗ ∈ blist then
6:
seeds[i] ∈R H
7:
else
0
8:
seeds[i] := f (t−t ) (seed )
9: return seeds

same user. NMComputeSeeds (see Algorithm 14) uses
the same trick when computing a seed that enables the
server to link a blacklisted user.
5.9

Periodic update

5.9.1 Per time period
At the end of each time period that is not the last of
the current linkability window, each registered server
updates its svrState by running (see Algorithm 7)
ServerUpdateStatesvrState (),
which prepares the linking-token-list for the new time
period. Each entry is updated by evolving the seed and
computing the corresponding nymble.
Each registered user sets ticketDisclosed in every
usrEntry in usrState to false, signaling that the user has
not disclosed any ticket in the new time period.
5.9.2 Per linkability window
At the beginning of each linkability window, all the
entities, i.e., the PM, the NM, the servers and the users

11

Algorithm 15 NMHandleComplaints

Algorithm 16 ServerUpdateState
Persistent state: svrState ∈ SS
1: Extract lnkng-tokens from svrState
2: for all i = 1 to |lnkng-tokens| do
3:
(seed , nymble) := lnkng-tokens[i]
4:
seed 0 := f (seed ); nymble 0 := g(seed 0 )
5:
tokens 0 [i] := (seed 0 , nymble 0 )
0
6: Replace lnkng-tokens in svrState with tokens
7: Replace seen-tickets in svrState with ∅

erase their state and start afresh. In other words, the NM
and the PM must re-setup Nymble for the new current
linkability window and all servers and users must reregister if they still want to use Nymble.

6

P ERFORMANCE E VALUATION

We implemented Nymble and collected various empirical performance numbers, which verify the linear (in the
number of “entries” as described below) time and space
costs of the various operations and data structures.
6.1

Implementation and experimental setup

We implemented Nymble as a C++ library along with
Ruby and JavaScript bindings. One could, however,
easily compile bindings for any of the languages (such
as Python, PHP, and Perl) supported by the Simplified
Wrapper and Interface Generator (SWIG) for example.
We utilize OpenSSL for all the cryptographic primitives.
We use SHA-256 for the cryptographic hash functions;
HMAC-SHA-256 for the message authentication MA;
AES-256 in CBC-mode for the symmetric encryption
Enc; and 2048-bit RSASSA-PSA for the digital signatures

250

Blacklist update request
Credential
Blacklist update response
Blacklist

200
Size (KB)

Input: (sid , t, w , blist, cert, cmplnt-tickets) ∈ H × N2 ×
Bn × C × T m
Persistent state: nmState ∈ SN
Output: (blist 0 , cert 0 , seeds) ∈ Bm × C × Hm
1: Extract time lastUpd from nmEntries[sid ] in nmState
2: b1 := (time lastUpd < t)
3: b2 :=
4:
NMVerifyBLnmState (sid , time lastUpd , w , blist, cert)
5: if ¬(b1 ∧ b2 ) then
6:
return ⊥
7: for all i = 1 to m do
8:
ticket := cmplnt-tickets[i]; (t̃, · · · ) := ticket
9:
bi1 := t̃ < t
10:
bi2 := NMVerifyTicketnmState (sid , t̃, w , ticket)
11:
if ¬(bi1 ∧ bi2 ) then
12:
return ⊥
0
13: (blist , cert 0 ) :=
14:
NMComputeBLUpdatenmState (sid , t, w , blist, cert)
15: seeds :=
16:
NMComputeSeedsnmState (t, blist, cmplnt-tickets)
0
17: return (blist , cert 0 , seeds)

150
100
50
0
0

200

400

600

800

1000

Number of Entries

Fig. 7. The marshaled size of various Nymble data
structures. The X-axis refers to the number of entries—
complaints in the blacklist update request, tickets in the
credential, tokens and seeds in the blacklist update response, and nymbles in the blacklist.

Sig. We chose RSA over DSA for digital signatures
because of its faster verification speed—in our system,
verification occurs more often than signing.
We evaluated our system on a 2.2 GHz Intel Core 2
Duo Macbook Pro with 4 GB of RAM. The PM, the NM,
and the server were implemented as Mongrel (Ruby’s
version of Apache) servers. The user portion was implemented as a Firefox 3 extension in JavaScript with
XPCOM bindings to the Nymble C++ library. For each
experiment relating to protocol performance, we report
the average of 10 runs. The evaluation of data-structure
sizes is the byte count of the marshalled data structures
that would be sent over the network.
6.2

Experimental results

Figure 7 shows the size of the various data structures.
The X-axis represents the number of entries in each data
structure—complaints in the blacklist update request,
tickets in the credential (equal to L, the number of time
periods in a linkability window), nymbles in the blacklist, tokens and seeds in the blacklist update response,
and nymbles in the blacklist. For example, a linkability
window of 1 day with 5 minute time periods equates
to L = 288.11 The size of a credential in this case is
about 59 KB. The size of a blacklist update request with
50 complaints is roughly 11 KB, whereas the size of a
blacklist update response for 50 complaints is only about
4 KB. The size of a blacklist (downloaded by users before
each connection) with 500 nymbles is 17 KB.
In general, each structure grows linearly as the number
of entries increases. Credentials and blacklist update
requests grow at the same rate because a credential is
a collection of tickets which is more or less what is sent
11. The security-related tradeoffs for this parameter are discussed in
Section 2.4. The performance tradeoffs are apparent in this section (see
Figures 7 and 8(a) for credential size and acquisition times).

12

overhead exhibited in the graph. It takes less than a
millisecond for a server to perform authentication of a
30
ticket against a blacklist with 500 nymbles. Every time
25
period (e.g., every 5 minutes), a server must update its
state and blacklist. Given a linking list with 500 entries,
20
the server will spend less than 2 ms updating the linking
15
list. If the server were to issue a blacklist update request
10
with 500 complaints, it would take less than 3 ms for the
server to update its blacklist.
5
To measure the latency perceived by an authenticating
0
user,
we simulated a client authenticating to a server
0
200
400
600
800
1000
with 500 blacklist entries. We simulated two scenarios,
Number of Entries
with the PM, NM and server (a) on the local network
(a) Blacklist updates take several milliseconds and credentials can be
and (b) on a remote machine (48 ms round trip time).12
generated in 9 ms for the suggested parameter of L=288.
On average it took a total of 470 ms for the full protocol
on the local network and 2001 ms for the remote case:
6
User blacklist validation and privacy check
acquiring a pseudonym (87 ms local; 307 ms remote) and
Server blacklist update
5
credential (107 ms; 575 ms), acquiring the blacklist and
Server update state
the server checking if the user is blacklisted (179 ms; 723
Server
ticket
examination
4
ms), and finally authenticating (97 ms; 295 ms).13
Credential acquisition
Blacklist update

Time (ms)

Time (ms)

35

3

7

2
1
0
0

200

400

600

800

1000

Number of Entries

(b) The bottleneck operation of server ticket examination is less than 1
ms and validating the blacklist takes the user only a few ms.

Fig. 8. Nymble’s performance at (a) the NM and (b) the
user and the server when performing various protocols.

as a complaint list when the server wishes to update
its blacklist. In our implementation we use Google’s
Protocol Buffers to (un)marshal these structures because
it is cross-platform friendly and language-agnostic.
Figure 8(a) shows the amount of time it takes the NM
to perform various protocols. It takes about 9 ms to
create a credential when L = 288. Note that this protocol
occurs only once every linkability window for each user
wanting to connect to a particular server. For blacklist
updates, the initial jump in the graph corresponds to the
fixed overhead associated with signing a blacklist. To execute the update blacklist protocol with 500 complaints
it takes the NM about 54 ms. However, when there are
no complaints, it takes the NM on average less than a
millisecond to update the daisy.
Figure 8(b) shows the amount of time it takes the
server and user to perform various protocols. These
protocols are relatively inexpensive by design, i.e., the
amount of computation performed by the users and
servers should be minimal. For example, it takes less
than 3 ms for a user to execute a security check on a
blacklist with 500 nymbles. Note that this figure includes
signature verification as well, and hence the fixed-cost

S ECURITY A NALYSIS

Theorem 1: Our Nymble construction has Blacklistability, Rate-limiting, Non-frameability and Anonymity provided that the trust assumptions in Section 3.2 hold true,
and the cryptographic primitives used are secure.
t
u
We summarize the proof of Theorem 1. Please refer to
our technical report [16] for a detailed version.
7.1

Blacklistability

An honest PM and NM will issue a coalition of c unique
users at most c valid credentials for a given server.
Because of the security of HMAC, only the NM can issue
valid tickets, and for any time period the coalition has
at most c valid tickets, and can thus make at most c
connections to the server in any time period regardless
of the server’s blacklisting. It suffices to show that if each
of the c users has been blacklisted in some previous time
period of the current linkability window, the coalition
cannot authenticate in the current time period k ∗ .
Assume the contrary that connection establishment k ∗
using one of the coalition members’ ticket ∗ was successful even though the user was blacklisted in a previous
time period k 0 . Since connection establishments k 0 and
k ∗ were successful, the corresponding tickets ticket 0 and
ticket ∗ must be valid. Assuming the security of digital
signatures and HMAC, an honest server can always
contact an honest NM with a valid ticket and the NM
will successfully terminate during the blacklist update.
Since the server blacklisted the valid ticket 0 and updates
its linking list honestly, the ServerLinkTicket will
return fail on input ticket ∗ , and thus the connection k ∗
must fail, which is a contradiction.
12. The remote machine was a 256 slice from Slicehost running
Ubuntu 4.09, and provide an indication of performance on the network.
13. For perspective, we note that with SSL disabled the total times
were 65 ms on the local network and 1086 ms for the remote case.

13

7.2

Non-Frameability

Assume the contrary that the adversary successfully
framed honest user i∗ with respect to an honest server
in time period t∗ , and thus user i∗ was unable to connect
in time period t∗ using ticket ∗ even though none of
his tickets were previously blacklisted. Because of the
security of HMAC, and since the PM and NM are honest,
the adversary cannot forge tickets for user i∗ , and the
server cannot already have seen ticket ∗ ; it must be that
ticket ∗ was linked to an entry in the linking list. Thus
there exists an entry (seed ∗ , nymble ∗ ) in the server’s linking list, such that the nymble in ticket ∗ equals nymble ∗ .
The server must have obtained this entry in a successful
blacklist update for some valid ticket b , implying the NM
had created this ticket for some user ĩ.
If ĩ 6= i∗ , then user ĩ’s seed 0 is different from user i∗ ’s
seed 0 so long as the PM is honest, and yet the two seed 0 ’s
evolve to the same seed ∗ , which contradicts the collisionresistance property of the evolution function. Thus we
have ĩ = i∗ . But as already argued, the adversary
cannot forge i∗ ’s ticket b , and it must be the case that
i∗ ’s ticket b was blacklisted before t∗ , which contradicts
our assumption that i∗ was a legitimate user in time t∗ .
7.3

Anonymity

We show that an adversary learns only that some legitimate user connected or that some illegitimate user’s
connection failed, i.e., there are two anonymity sets of
legitimate and illegitimate users.
Distinguishing between two illegitimate users We
argue that any two chosen illegitimate users out of
the control of the adversary will react indistinguishably.
Since all honest users execute the Nymble-connection Establishment protocol in exactly the same manner up until
the end of the Blacklist validation stage (Section 5.5.1), it
suffices to show that every illegitimate user will evaluate
safe to false, and hence terminate the protocol with
failure at the end of the Privacy check stage (Section 5.5.2).
For an illegitimate user (attempting a new connection) who has already disclosed a ticket during a connection establishment earlier in the same time period,
ticketDisclosed for the server will have been set to true
and safe is evaluated to false during establishment k ∗ .
An illegitimate user who has not disclosed a ticket
during the same time period must already be blacklisted.
Thus the server complained about some previous ticket ∗
of the user. Since the NM is honest, the user’s nymble ∗
appears in some previous blacklist of the server. Since an
honest NM never deletes entries from a blacklist, it will
appear in all subsequent blacklists, and safe is evaluated
to false for the current blacklist. Servers cannot forge
blacklists or present blacklists for earlier time periods
(as otherwise the digital signature would be forgeable,
or the hash in the daisy chain could be inverted).
Distinguishing between two legitimate users The
authenticity of the channel implies that a legitimate
user knows the correct identity of the server and thus

boolean ticketDisclosed for the server remains false.
Furthermore, UserCheckIfBlacklisted returns false
(assuming the security of digital signatures) and safe is
evaluated to true for the legitimate user.
Now, in the ticket presented by the user, only nymble
and ctxt are functions of the user’s identity. Since the
adversary does not know the decryption key, the CCA2
security of the encryption implies that ctxt reveals no
information about the user’s identity to the adversary.
Finally, since the server has not obtained any seeds for
the user, under the Random Oracle model the nymble
presented by the user is indistinguishable from random
and cannot be linked with other nymbles presented by
the user. Furthermore, if and when the server complains
about a user’s tickets in the future, the NM ensures
that only one real seed is issued (subsequent seeds
corresponding to the same user are random values), and
thus the server cannot distinguish between legitimate
users for a particular time period by issuing complaints
in a future time period.
7.4

Across multiple linkability windows

With multiple linkability windows, our Nymble construction still has Accountability and Non-frameability
because each ticket is valid for and only for a specific linkability window; it still has Anonymity because
pseudonyms are an output of a collision-resistant function that takes the linkability window as input.

8

D ISCUSSION

IP-address blocking By picking IP addresses as the
resource for limiting the Sybil attack, our current implementation closely mimics IP-address blocking employed by Internet services. There are, however, some
inherent limitations to using IP addresses as the scarce
resource. If a user can obtain multiple addresses she can
circumvent both nymble-based and regular IP-address
blocking. Subnet-based blocking alleviates this problem,
and while it is possible to modify our system to support
subnet-based blocking, new privacy challenges emerge;
a more thorough description is left for future work.
Other resources Users of anonymizing networks
would be reluctant to use resources that directly reveal
their identity (e.g., passports or a national PKI). Email
addresses could provide more privacy, but provide weak
blacklistability guarantees because users can easily create
new email addresses. Other possible resources include
client puzzles [25] and e-cash, where users are required
to perform a certain amount of computation or pay
money to acquire a credential. These approaches would
limit the number of credentials obtained by a single
individual by raising the cost of acquiring credentials.
Server-specific linkability windows An enhancement
would be to provide support to vary T and L for different servers. As described, our system does not support
varying linkability windows, but does support varying
time periods. This is because the PM is not aware of

14

the server the user wishes to connect to, yet it must
issue pseudonyms specific to a linkability window. We
do note that the use of resources such as client puzzles
or e-cash would eliminate the need for a PM, and users
could obtain Nymbles directly from the NM. In that case,
server-specific linkability windows could be used.
Side-channel attacks While our current implementation does not fully protect against side-channel attacks,
we mitigate the risks. We have implemented various
algorithms in a way that their execution time leaks little
information that cannot already be inferred from the
algorithm’s output. Also, since a confidential channel
does not hide the size of the communication, we have
constructed the protocols so that each kind of protocol
message is of the same size regardless of the identity or
current legitimacy of the user.

9

C ONCLUSIONS

We have proposed and built a comprehensive credential
system called Nymble, which can be used to add a layer
of accountability to any publicly known anonymizing
network. Servers can blacklist misbehaving users while
maintaining their privacy, and we show how these properties can be attained in a way that is practical, efficient,
and sensitive to needs of both users and services.
We hope that our work will increase the mainstream
acceptance of anonymizing networks such as Tor, which
has thus far been completely blocked by several services
because of users who abuse their anonymity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Peter C. Johnson and Daniel Peebles helped in the early
stages of prototyping. We are grateful for the suggestions
and help from Roger Dingledine and Nick Mathewson.

R EFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]

[6]
[7]
[8]

G. Ateniese, J. Camenisch, M. Joye, and G. Tsudik. A Practical and
Provably Secure Coalition-Resistant Group Signature Scheme. In
CRYPTO, LNCS 1880, pages 255–270. Springer, 2000.
G. Ateniese, D. X. Song, and G. Tsudik. Quasi-Efficient Revocation
in Group Signatures. In Financial Cryptography, LNCS 2357, pages
183–197. Springer, 2002.
M. Bellare, R. Canetti, and H. Krawczyk. Keying Hash Functions
for Message Authentication. In CRYPTO, LNCS 1109, pages 1–15.
Springer, 1996.
M. Bellare, A. Desai, E. Jokipii, and P. Rogaway. A Concrete
Security Treatment of Symmetric Encryption. In FOCS, pages
394–403, 1997.
M. Bellare and P. Rogaway. Random Oracles Are Practical: A
Paradigm for Designing Efficient Protocols. In Proceedings of the
1st ACM conference on Computer and communications security, pages
62–73. ACM Press, 1993.
M. Bellare, H. Shi, and C. Zhang. Foundations of Group Signatures: The Case of Dynamic Groups. In CT-RSA, LNCS 3376,
pages 136–153. Springer, 2005.
D. Boneh and H. Shacham. Group Signatures with Verifier-Local
Revocation. In ACM Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, pages 168–177. ACM, 2004.
S. Brands. Untraceable Off-line Cash in Wallets with Observers
(Extended Abstract). In CRYPTO, LNCS 773, pages 302–318.
Springer, 1993.

[9]

E. Bresson and J. Stern. Efficient Revocation in Group Signatures.
In Public Key Cryptography, LNCS 1992, pages 190–206. Springer,
2001.
[10] J. Camenisch and A. Lysyanskaya. An Efficient System for Nontransferable Anonymous Credentials with Optional Anonymity
Revocation. In EUROCRYPT, LNCS 2045, pages 93–118. Springer,
2001.
[11] J. Camenisch and A. Lysyanskaya. Dynamic Accumulators and
Application to Efficient Revocation of Anonymous Credentials. In
CRYPTO, LNCS 2442, pages 61–76. Springer, 2002.
[12] J. Camenisch and A. Lysyanskaya. Signature Schemes and Anonymous Credentials from Bilinear Maps. In CRYPTO, LNCS 3152,
pages 56–72. Springer, 2004.
[13] D. Chaum. Blind Signatures for Untraceable Payments. In
CRYPTO, pages 199–203, 1982.
[14] D. Chaum. Showing Credentials without Identification Transfeering Signatures between Unconditionally Unlinkable Pseudonyms.
In AUSCRYPT, LNCS 453, pages 246–264. Springer, 1990.
[15] D. Chaum and E. van Heyst. Group Signatures. In EUROCRYPT,
pages 257–265, 1991.
[16] C. Cornelius, A. Kapadia, P. P. Tsang, and S. W. Smith. Nymble:
Blocking Misbehaving Users in Anonymizing Networks. Technical Report TR2008-637, Dartmouth College, Computer Science,
Hanover, NH, December 2008.
[17] I. Damgård. Payment Systems and Credential Mechanisms with
Provable Security Against Abuse by Individuals. In CRYPTO,
LNCS 403, pages 328–335. Springer, 1988.
[18] R. Dingledine, N. Mathewson, and P. Syverson. Tor: The SecondGeneration Onion Router. In Usenix Security Symposium, pages
303–320, Aug. 2004.
[19] J. R. Douceur. The Sybil Attack. In IPTPS, LNCS 2429, pages
251–260. Springer, 2002.
[20] S. Even, O. Goldreich, and S. Micali. On-Line/Off-Line Digital
Schemes. In CRYPTO, LNCS 435, pages 263–275. Springer, 1989.
[21] J. Feigenbaum, A. Johnson, and P. F. Syverson. A Model of Onion
Routing with Provable Anonymity. In Financial Cryptography,
LNCS 4886, pages 57–71. Springer, 2007.
[22] S. Goldwasser, S. Micali, and R. L. Rivest. A Digital Signature
Scheme Secure Against Adaptive Chosen-Message Attacks. SIAM
J. Comput., 17(2):281–308, 1988.
[23] J. E. Holt and K. E. Seamons. Nym: Practical Pseudonymity for
Anonymous Networks. Internet Security Research Lab Technical
Report 2006-4, Brigham Young University, June 2006.
[24] P. C. Johnson, A. Kapadia, P. P. Tsang, and S. W. Smith. Nymble:
Anonymous IP-Address Blocking. In Privacy Enhancing Technologies, LNCS 4776, pages 113–133. Springer, 2007.
[25] A. Juels and J. G. Brainard. Client Puzzles: A Cryptographic
Countermeasure Against Connection Depletion Attacks. In NDSS.
The Internet Society, 1999.
[26] A. Kiayias, Y. Tsiounis, and M. Yung. Traceable Signatures. In
EUROCRYPT, LNCS 3027, pages 571–589. Springer, 2004.
[27] B. N. Levine, C. Shields, and N. B. Margolin. A Survey of
Solutions to the Sybil Attack. Technical Report Tech report 2006052, University of Massachusetts Amherst, Oct 2006.
[28] A. Lysyanskaya, R. L. Rivest, A. Sahai, and S. Wolf. Pseudonym
Systems. In Selected Areas in Cryptography, LNCS 1758, pages 184–
199. Springer, 1999.
[29] S. Micali. NOVOMODO: Scalable Certificate Validation and
Simplified PKI Management. In 1st Annual PKI Research Workshop
- Proceeding, April 2002.
[30] T. Nakanishi and N. Funabiki. Verifier-Local Revocation Group
Signature Schemes with Backward Unlinkability from Bilinear
Maps. In ASIACRYPT, LNCS 3788, pages 533–548. Springer, 2005.
[31] L. Nguyen. Accumulators from Bilinear Pairings and Applications. In CT-RSA, LNCS 3376, pages 275–292. Springer, 2005.
[32] I. Teranishi, J. Furukawa, and K. Sako. k-Times Anonymous
Authentication (Extended Abstract). In ASIACRYPT, LNCS 3329,
pages 308–322. Springer, 2004.
[33] P. P. Tsang, M. H. Au, A. Kapadia, and S. W. Smith. Blacklistable
Anonymous Credentials: Blocking Misbehaving Users Without
TTPs. In CCS ’07: Proceedings of the 14th ACM conference on
Computer and communications security, pages 72–81, New York, NY,
USA, 2007. ACM.
[34] P. P. Tsang, M. H. Au, A. Kapadia, and S. W. Smith. PEREA:
Towards Practical TTP-Free Revocation in Anonymous Authentication. In ACM Conference on Computer and Communications
Security, pages 333–344. ACM, 2008.

15

Patrick Tsang is a Ph.D. candidate in the Computer Science department at Dartmouth College.
His research covers security and trust in computers and networks, privacy-enhancing technologies and applied cryptography. He is particularly
interested in developing scalable security and
privacy solutions for resource-constrained environments. He is a member of the International
Association for Cryptologic Research (IACR).

Dr. Apu Kapadia received his Ph.D. from the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and
received a four-year High-Performance Computer Science Fellowship from the Department
of Energy for his dissertation research. Following
his doctorate, Apu joined Dartmouth College
as a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with the
Institute for Security Technology Studies (ISTS),
and then as a Member of Technical Staff at MIT
Lincoln Laboratory. He joined Indiana University Bloomington as an Assistant Professor in
the School of Informatics and Computing in 2009. Apu is an active
researcher in security and privacy and is particularly interested in
anonymizing networks, usable security, security in peer-to-peer and
mobile networks, and applied cryptography. He is a member of IEEE
and ACM.

Cory Cornelius is a Ph.D. student in the Computer Science department at Dartmouth College. His research interests are security, privacy,
networks, and, in particular, the intersection of
these fields.

Prof. Sean W. Smith has been active in information security since before there was a Web.
Previously a research scientist at Los Alamos
National Lab and at IBM, he joined Dartmouth
in 2000. Sean has published two books; been
granted over a dozen patents; and advised over
three dozen Ph.D., M.S., and senior honors theses. Sean was educated at Princeton and CMU,
and is a member of Phi Beta Kappa and Sigma
Xi.

