cation presented here is sufficient to guide both re-
implementations  and new applications of onion rout-
ing.
This paper is organized in the following way. Sec-
tion
2 presents an overview of onion routing. Section
3 presents  empirical data about our  prototype. Sec-
tion
4 defines our threat model. Section 5 describes
onion  routing and the application specific  proxies in
more detail. Section
6 describes the system’s vulner-
abilities,  and section
7 describes the implementation
choices that were made for security reasons.  Section
8
presents related work, and section 9 presents conclud-
ing remarks.
2 Onion Routing Overview
In onion routing, instead of making socket  connec-
tions directly to a  responding  machine, initiating ap-
plications make connections through
a sequence of ma-
chines called
onion routers. The onion routing network
allows the connection between the initiaior and respon-
der
to remain anonymous. We call this an anonymous
socket connection
or  anonymous  connection. Anony-
mous connections hide who
is connected to whom, and
for what purpose, from both outside eavesdroppers and
compromised  onion routers. If anonymity is also de-
sired, then all identifying information must be removed
from the data stream before being sent over the anony-
mous connection.
We call the onion routing network topology that we
use in this paper the
basic configuration. This is illus-
trated in figure
1.
-.
--__
Secure Site ‘\,Internet
Secure Site
./ T\
Node controlled bv
~
.-
__--- - Anonymous Connection from W to Z
Link Encrypted Connection Between Onion Routers
Onion Router
Proxy/Onion Router
0
0
Figure 1. Routing Topology.
In the basic  configuration, an onion router  sits on
the firewall of
a sensitive site. This onion router serves
as an interface between machines  behind the firewall
and the external  network.  Connections from machines
behind the firewall
to the onion router are protected
by other means (e.g., physical security). To complicate
tracking of traffic originating or terminating within the
sensitive site, this onion router  should also route data
between other onion routers. This is the basic topology
that we will use for the rest of this paper.
The use
of anonymous connections by two sensitive
sites that both control  onion routers effectively hides
their  communication  from  outsiders. However, if the
responder  is not in
a sensitive site (e.g., the responder
is some arbitrary Web server) the data stream from
the sensitive initiator must also be  anonymixed. Oth-
erwise, even rudimentary analysis of the unprotected
communication between the last onion router in the
anonymous connection and the responder may reveal
the initiator’s identity.
Onion routers in the network are connected by long-
standing (permanent) socket connections.  Anonymous
connections through the network are multiplexed over
the longstanding connections. For any anonymous con-
nection, the sequence of onion routers in
a route is
strictly defined at connection setup. However,  each
onion  router can only identify the previous and next
hops along  a route. Data passed along the anony-
mous connection appears different at each onion router,
so data cannot be  tracked en route and compromised
onion routers cannot  cooperate by correlating the data
stream each sees.
The onion routing network is accessed via
proxies.
An initiating application makes a socket connection to
an application specific  proxy on some onion router.
That proxy defines
a route  through the onion rout-
ing network by constructing
a layered data structure
called an
onion and sending that onion through the
network. Each layer of the onion defines the next hop
in
a route. An onion router that receives an onion
peels
off its layer, identifies the next hop, and sends
the embedded onion to that onion router. After  send-
ing the onion, the initiator’s proxy sends data through
the anonymous connection.
The last onion router forwards data to another type
of proxy  on the same machine, called the responder’s
proxy, whose job is to pass data between the onion
network and the responder. An example  onion rout-
ing network and anonymous socket connection  is  also
illustrated in figure
1.
In addition to carrying next hop information, each
onion layer contains key seed material from which keys
are generated for crypting’ data sent forward or back-
‘We define the verb
crypt to mean the application of a cryp-
tographic operation, be
it encryption or decryption.
45
ward along the anonymous connection.  (We define for-
ward to be the direction in which the onion travels and
backward as the opposite  direction.)
Once the anonymous connection  is established, it
can  carry data. Before sending data over an anony-
mous connection, the initiator's onion router  adds a
layer of encryption for  each onion router in the route.
As data moves through the anonymous connection,
each onion router removes one layer of encryption,
so
it arrives at the receiver as plaintext. This layering oc-
curs in the reverse order for data moving back to the
initiator.
So data that has passed backward through
the anonymous connection must  be repeatedly  post-
crypted to obtain the plaintext.
By layering cryptographic operations in this way,
we gain an advantage over link encryption. As data
moves through the network it appears different to each
onion router. Therefore, an anonymous connection is
as strong as its strongest link, and even one honest node
is enough to maintain the privacy
of the route. In link
encrypted systems, compromised nodes  can cooperate
to uncover route information.
Although we call this  system  onion routing, the
routing that occurs here does
so at the application
layer of the protocol  stack and not
at the IP layer.
More specifically, we rely upon IP routing to route data
passed through longstanding socket  connections. An
anonymous connection is comprised of several  linked
longstanding socket connections. Therefore, although
the series of onion routers in an anonymous connection
is fixed for the lifetime of that anonymous connection,
the route that data actually travels between individual
onion routers is determined by the underlying
IP net-
work. Thus, onion routing may be compared to loose
source routing.
Onion routing depends  upon connection  based  ser-
vices that deliver data uncorrupted and in-order. This
simplifies the specification of the system. TCP socket
connections, which are layered on top of
a connection-
less service like IP, provide these guarantees.  Similarly,
onion routing could easily be layered  on top of other
connection  based services,  like ATM.
Our current prototype of onion routing considers the
network topology to be static and does not have mecha-
nisms to automatically distribute or update public keys
or network  topology. These issues, though important,
are not the key parts of onion routing and will be ad-
dressed in
a later prototype.
3 Empirical Data
We invite readers to experiment  with our pro-
totype of onion  routing by using it to anony-
mously  surf the Web, send  anonymous e-mail, and
do  remote logins. For instructions please see
http://www.itd.nrl.navy.mil/ITD/5540/
pro j ect s/onion-rout ing.
Be aware that accessing a remote onion router does
not really preserve anonymity, because the connection
between your machine and the first onion router is not
protected. Even if that connection were protected, you
have no reason to trust the remote onion router.
If you
had
a secured  connection to an onion router you trust,
it could use our onion router  as one of several inter-
mediate routers to further complicate traffic analysis.
Remote use
of our site provides  no greater anonymity
than is provided by the Anonymizer
[l].
In our experimental  onion routing network, five
onion routers  run on
a single Sun UltraSparc 2270.
This machine has two processors, and
256MB of mem-
ory. Anonymous connections are routed through
a ran-
dom sequence of five onion routers.2 Connection setup
time should be comparable to
a more distributed topol-
ogy. Data latency, however, is more difficult to judge.
Clearly, data will travel faster over  socket connections
between onion routers on the same machine than over
socket connections  between different machines.
How-
ever, the removal or addition of layers of encryption is
not pipelined,
so data latency may be worse on a single
machine.
Onion  routing's overhead  is mainly  due to public
key cryptography and is incurred while setting up an
anonymous  connection.  On an UltraSparc running a
fast implementation of RSA
[a], a single public key de-
cryption
of a 1024 bit plaintext block using a 1024 bit
private key and
a 1024 bit modulus takes 90 millisec-
onds. Encryption is much faster, because the public
keys are only 16 bits long. (This is why RSA signature
verification is cheaper than signing).
So, the public key
cryptographic overhead  for routes spanning five onion
routers is just under
0.5 seconds. This overhead  can
be further reduced,  either  with specialized hardware,
or even on PCs
(a 200 Mhz Pentium would be twice as
fast).
Relatively large connection setup overhead may be
tolerable in some  applications. For example, socket
connection setup may be slow anyway. If
a connection
is long lived, setup overhead may be reasonable. For
example, in WWW requests, a single document may
require  several requests
to the same host to retrieve
different components
of the same document. Although
each individual request and response pair may be short,
the combination of all request/response  pairs may be
lengthy. There
is no reason that the same anonymous
2Five onion routing hops per connection provides reasonable
security at reasonable cost. See section
6.
46
connection could not  be used to carry the traffic  for
each of the real socket connections, either sequentially
or multiplexed.  In fact, the preliminary specification
for HTTP
1.1 defines pipelined  connections to amor-
tize the cost of socket setup, and pipelined connections
would also transparently amortize the increased cost of
anonymous connection setup.  Our Web proxy will be
made
HTTP 1.1 compliant when HTTP 1.1 is adopted.
4 Threat Model
We assume that the network is subject to both pas-
sive and active eavesdropping. That is:
0 All traffic  is visible.
0 All traffic can be modified.
0 Onion routers may be compromised.
0 Compromised onion routers  may cooperate.
In addition,
a sophisticated  adversary may be able
to detect timing coincidences  such as the near  simul-
taneous  opening of connections. Timing coincidences
are very difficult to overcome without  wasting network
capacity, especially  when real-time  communication is
important.
The initiator’s proxy and the first onion router are
the most trusted elements of the onion routing system.
That is one reason why, in our basic configuration, both
the proxy and onion router are placed under the control
of the sensitive site.
This threat model directly motivates certain design
decisions in onion routing. Because  traffic is  visible,
the headers and payload of all traffic are essentially
link encrypted between  onion routers
so the same data
looks different  when traveling between onion  routers.
Because traffic can  be  modified, stream ciphers
[14]
are used for encryption.  Inserting,  deleting, modify-
ing,
or replaying traffic anywhere en route will disrupt
the stream and will result  in persistent unrecogniz-
able changes downstream; thus, data cannot be tracked
moving through the system. However, the plaintext
will be unreadable by the responder,  causing
a denial-
of-service attack. Because onion routers may be com-
promised,  anonymous connections span several onion
routers. Because compromised  onion routers may co-
operate, data is encrypted in
a layered fashion so it ap-
pears different to each onion router, not only between
onion routers.
In
general, our design chooses denial-of-service over
the compromise of private  information. For example,
we assume that  data moves through sockets in order
and  uncorrupted. A compromised onion router can
easily violate this assumption; however, the result is
unpredictable and unreadable data emerging from the
system rather than the direct release of any informa-
tion. Since replay of an onion will  cause the same
embedded  onions to appear downstream, onion replay
may reveal connection information. However, onions
themselves cannot be replayed through an honest node.
Onion routers remember  onions they have  passed  by
storing
a hash of previously passed onions. If a replay is
detected, the onion is simply dropped.
To control stor-
age requirements,  onions are equipped with expiration
times. Here too, denial-of-service supersedes  compro-
mise. If clocks are far enough out of synchronization
one way, the only possible result is  for
a fresh  onion
to be viewed as expired and ignored. If they are far
enough out of synchronization the other way, the only
possible result is for
a passed onion to be stored beyond
its expiration.
5 Onion Routing
5.1 Onion Routing Proxies
A proxy is a transparent service  between two appli-
cations that would usually make a  direct socket  con-
nection
to each other but cannot. For example, a fire-
wall might prevent  direct  socket  connections between
internal and  external machines.  A  proxy running on
the firewall may enable such connections.  Proxy  aware
applications are becoming quite common.
Our goal has been to design an architecture for pri-
vate communication that would interface with
unmodi-
fied applications, so we chose to use proxies as the inter-
face between applications and onion routing’s anony-
mous connections.
For applications that are designed
to be  proxy aware, (e.g., WWW browsers), we sim-
ply  design appropriate interface  proxies.  Surprisingly,
for certain applications that are not proxy aware (e.g.,
RLOGIN), we have also been able to design interface
proxies. In  this  paper, we will focus on the HTTP
proxy for Web browsing.
In the basic  configuration  where
a firewall lives be-
tween
a trusted and untrusted network, the onion
router and its proxies live on the firewall. There  are
two classes of proxies: one that bridges  connections
from initiating applications into the onion routing net-
work (the application proxy), and  another that com-
pletes the connection from the onion routing network
to responders (the responder  proxy).
Because the application proxy  bridges  between ap-
plications and the onion routing network, it must un-
derstand both application  protocols and onion rout-
47
ing protocols.  Therefore, to simplify the design of ap-
plication specific proxies, we partition the proxy into
two components: the
client proxy and the core proxy.
The client proxy  bridges between a socket connection
from an application and
a socket connection to the core
proxy. It
is the obligation of the client proxy to massage
the data stream
so both the core proxy and the respon-
der proxy can be application independent. Specifically,
the client  proxy must prepend to the data stream
a
standard structure that identifies the ultimate destina-
tion by either hostname/port or IP address/port. Ad-
ditionally, it must process
a one byte return code from
the responder proxy and either  continue if no
error is
reported
or report the onion routing error code in some
application specific meaningful way.
Upon receiving
a new request, the core proxy uses
the prepended standard  structure as
a hint in build-
ing an onion defining the route
of an anonymous con-
nection to that destination. It then passes the onion
to the onion routing network building the anonymous
connection to the responder  proxy, and then passes the
prepended standard structure to the responder  proxy
specifying the ultimate destination. From this point
on, the core proxy blindly relays data back and forth
between the client proxy and the onion routing network
(and thus the responder  proxy at the other end of the
anonymous connection).
For the services we have considered to date, a nearly
generic responder  proxy is adequate. Its function is
to read the data stream from the terminating onion
router. The first datum received  will be the stan-
dard structure specifying the ultimate destination. The
responder proxy makes
a socket connection to that
IP/port, reports
a one byte status message back to the
onion routing network (and thus back to the core proxy
which in turn forwards it back to the client proxy),
and subsequently moves data between the onion rout-
ing network and the new socket.
(For certain services,
like RLOGIN, the responder  proxy also infers that the
new socket must originate from a trusted port.)
As an example, consider the client proxy for HTTP.
The user  configures his browser to use the onion rout-
ing proxy. His  browser may send the proxy
a re-
quests like
GET http: //www .domino. com/showcase/
HTTP/i, 0 followed by optional fields.
The client proxy is listening for new requests.  Once
it obtains the
GET request, it creates the standard
structure  and sends it (along
a new socket connec-
tion) to the core proxy, to inform the core proxy of the
service and destination of the anonymous connection.
The client  proxy then modifies the
GET request to GET
/showcase/ HTTP/I .O and sends it directly (through
the anonymous connection) to the HTTP server, fol-
lowed by the optional fields.  Notice that the server
name and
http: // are eliminated because the connec-
tion is made directly to the HTTP server.
The client proxy  essentially makes
a connection to
nnn.domino.com, and issues a request as if it were a
client. Once this request  is transmitted to the server,
all proxies blindly forward data in both directions be-
tween the client and the server until the socket is bro-
ken by either side.
For the anonymizing  onion  routing HTTP proxy,
the client proxy  proceeds as outlined above with  one
change: it is now necessary to sanitize the optional
fields
that follow the GET command because they may
contain identity information. Furthermore, the data
stream during
a connection must be monitored, to san-
itize additional headers that might occur during the
connection. For our anonymizing HTTP proxy, opera-
tions that store cookies on the user’s browser (to track
a user, for example)  are removed. This reduces  func-
tion,
so applications that depend  upon cookies (like
online shopping baskets) may not work properly.
The core proxy’s function is to pass data between
multiple socket connections from client proxies and the
first  onion router. Therefore, the core proxy is not ap-
plication specific but must understand the onion rout-
ing protocol, which  defines how multiplexed connec-
tions are handled. The core proxy must repeatedly
pre-crypt the data stream before passing it along the
onion routing network. The repeated pre-cryptions are
the inverses of the cryptographic functions that will be
applied by the onion routers
as the data moves along
the anonymous connection.  Similarly, the core proxy
must repeatedly  post-crypt data from the anonymous
connection with the inverses of the cryptographic func-
tions that were applied by the onion routers, before
passing the plaintext to the client  proxy.
5.2 Implementation
This section presents the interface  specification be-
tween the components in an onion routing system. To
provide some structure to this specification, we will
discuss components in the order that data would move
from an initiating client to a responding  server.
There are four phases  in an onion routing sys-
tem: network setup, which establishes the longstanding
connections  between onion routers; connection setup,
which establishes anonymous connections through the
onion router network; data movement over
a anony-
mous connection; and the destruction and cleanup of
anonymous connections. We will commingle the dis-
cussion of these below.
48
5.3 Client Proxy
The interface between an application and the client
proxy is application specific. The interface between the
client  proxy and the core  proxy is  defined as follows.
For each new proxy request, the client proxy first deter-
mines if it will handle or deny the request. If rejected, it
reports an application specific error message and then
closes the socket and waits for the next  request.
If
accepted, it creates a socket to the core proxy’s well
known port. The client proxy then sends
a standard
structure to the core proxy of the form:
0 1 2 3
01234567890123456789012345678901
t-+-+-+-t-+-+-t-+-+-+-t-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-t-+-+-t-+-+-+-+-+-t-+-t
I Version I Protocol I Retry Count I Addr Format I
+-t-t-t-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-t-t-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
Version is currently defined to be 1. Protocol is
either
1 for RLOGIN, 2 for HTTP, or 3 for SMTP.
Retry Count specifies  how many times the responder
proxy should attempt to retry connecting to the ulti-
mate destination.  Finally, the
Addr Format field spec-
ifies the form of the ultimate destination  address:
1
for a NULL terminated ASCII string with the host-
name immediately followed by another
NULL termi-
nated ASCII string with the destination port number,
or  a
2 for sockaddr-in data structure specifying both
the internet  address and the destination port. The ul-
timate destination  address is sent  after this standard
structure,  and the client proxy waits for
a one  byte
error code before sending data.
5.4 Core Proxy
Upon receiving the standard  structure,  the core
proxy  can  decide whether to accept
or reject the re-
quest based on the protocol,  anonymity, destination
host, destination port, or the identity of the client
proxy. If rejected, it sends an appropriate error code
back to the client proxy, closes the socket, and waits for
the next request. If accepted, it proceeds to build the
anonymous connection to the responder  proxy  using
the standard structure, sends the standard  structure
to the responder  proxy over the anonymous connec-
tion, and then passes all future data to and from the
client proxy and anonymous connection. The repeated
pre and post  cryptions and packaging of the data is
discussed later in section  5.6.
5.5 Onions
To build the anonymous connection to the respon-
der proxy, the core proxy creates an onion.  An  onion
is
a multi-layered data structure that encapsulates the
route of the anonymous connection starting from the
responder proxy and working backward to the core
proxy.
Each  layer has the following structure:
0 1 2 3
012345678901234667890~2346678901
+-+-+-t-+-t-t-+-+-+-t-+-+-+-t-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-t-+
I01 Version IBack FlForp FI Destination Port I
I Destination Address I
I
Expiration Time (GNT) I
I
I
I I
t Key Seed Naterial +
I I
I I
+-t-+-+-+-+-t-+-t-+-+-t-+-t-t-t-t-+-+-+-+-+-t-+-+-+-+-+-t-+-+-t-+
t-t-t-t-t-+-+-+-+-+-+-t-t-+-+-t-+-+-t-t-t-+-t-t-t-t-+-t-t-t-+-+-+
t-+-t-+-t-t-t-+-t-t-+-+-+-+-+-t-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-t-t-+-+-t-+-t-t-+-t
+ +
t +
+-+-+-t-+-t-t-t-t-t-t-t-t-t-t-t-t-t-+-+-+-+-+-t-t-+-t-+-t-t-t-t-t
As we will see below, the first bit must be zero for
RSA public key cryptography to succeed. Following
the zero bit is the
Version Number of the onion routing
system, currently defined to be
1.
The Back F field denotes the cryptographic function
to be  applied to data moving in the backward direc-
tion (defined as data moving in the opposite direction
that the onion traveled, usually toward the initiator’s
end of the anonymous socket connection)  using
key:!
defined  below. The Forw F field denotes the crypto-
graphic  function to be  applied to data moving in the
forward direction (defined as data moving in the same
direction that the onion traveled, usually  toward the
responder’s  end of the anonymous socket connection)
using
key3 defined  below. Currently defined crypto-
graphic functions are:
0 for Identity (no encryption),  1
for
DES OFB (output feedback mode) (56 bit key), and
2 for RC4 (128 bit key). The
Destination  Address and
Destination  Port indicate the next onion routser in net-
work order and are both
0 for the responder proxy. The
Expiration Time is given in  network order in seconds
relative to
0O:OO:OO UTC January 1, 1970 (i.e.  stan-
dard UNIX time(2) format) and specifies how long the
onion router at this hop  in the anonymous connection
must track the onion against replays before it expires.
Key Seed Material is 128 bits long and is hashed three
times  with SHA to produce three cryptographic keys
(keyl, keyz, and key3) of 128-bits each (the first  eight
bytes of each SHA output  are used for DES and  the
first 16 bytes for RC4 keys).3
Since we use  RSA public key cryptography with a
modulus size of 1024-bits, the plaintext block  size is
1024 bits and must be strictly less than the modulus
3Details on the cryptographic operations used in this paper
can be found in
[14].
49
numerically. To avoid problems, we force this relation
by putting the most-significant bit first and setting it
to
0 (the leading 0 above). Furthermore, the inner-
most layer of the onion is padded on the end with an
additional
100 bytes  prior to RSA encryption being
performed.
In version
1, an onion has five layers. An onion
is formed  iteratively, innermost layer first. At each
iteration, the first
128 bytes of the onion are encrypted
with the public key
of the onion router that is intended
to decrypt that layer. The remainder of the onion is
encrypted, using DES
OFB with an IV  (initialization
vector) of
0 and key1 (derived from Key Seed Material
in that layer as defined ab~ve).~
Before discussing how onions and data are sent be-
tween onion routers, we will define onion router  inter-
connection.
5.6 Onion Router Interconnection
During  onion  network setup  (not to be confused
with anonymous connection setup), longstanding con-
nections between neighboring  onion routers are estab-
lished and keyed. The network  topology is predefined
and each onion router knows its neighbors and the RSA
public keys of all nodes in the network.
To remain connected to each of its neighbors,  onion
routers must  both listen
for connections from neigh-
bors and attempt to initiate connections to neighbors.
To avoid deadlock and collision  issues  between pairs
of neighbors, an onion router listens for connections
from neighbors with “higher” IP/port addresses and
initiates connections to neighbors with “lower” IP/port
addresses.  “Higher” and “Lower” are defined with re-
spect to network byte ordering.
The protocol has two phases:  connection setup and
keying. The initiating onion router opens
a socket to
a well known port of its neighboring onion router, and
sends
its IP address and well known port  (the port is
included to allow multiple onion routers to run on
a
single machine) in network order to identify itself. The
keying phase ensues, using
STS [8] which  will  gener-
ate two DES 56-bit keys. The link encryption over the
longstanding connections  is done by DES OFB with
IVs
of 0 and these two  keys (one for data in each  di-
rection).
Once  keyed, communication between onion routers
is packaged into fixed sized
cells, which  allows for the
multiplexing of both anonymous connections and con-
trol information over the longstanding connections. In
We use DES to encrypt the onion, and for link encryption
between onion routers, because it has no licensing fees and can be
used as
a pseudorandom number generator. We would be happy
to use
a stronger pseudorandom number generator, however.
version 1 of the onion routing system, there  are four
types of cells: PADDING
(0), CREATE (l), DATA
(a), and DESTROY (3).
Cells have the following structure:
0 1 2  3
01234567890123456789012345678901
t-+-+-+-+-t-+-t-+-+-+-t-+-+-+-+-t-t-+-+-+-+-+-+-t-+-+-+-+-t-t-+-+
I ACI I Command I Length I
+-t-+-+-+-t-t-+-+-+-t-t-t-t-+-t-t-t-t-+-+-+-+-t-t-t-t-+-+-+-t-t-+
....................... Payload (44 bytes) .......................
+-+-+-+-+-t-+-+-+-+-+-t-t-+-+-+-+-t-+-+-+-+-t-+-t-t-+-+-+-t-t-t-+
I  I
I I
The ACI (anonymous connection  identifier) and
Command fields are always encrypted using the link
encryption between neighboring nodes.  Additionally,
the
Length and Payload fields are encrypted using the
link encryption between neighboring nodes if the com-
mand is either PADDING
(0) or DESTROY (3). For
CREATE
(1) commands, the length is link encrypted,
but the payload is already  encrypted because it car-
ries the onion.
For DATA (2) commands, the length
and entire payload are encrypted using the anonymous
connection’s forward
or backward cryptographic oper-
ations.
Each  anonymous connection
is assigned an ACI at
each onion router, which labels an anonymous connec-
tion when it is multiplexed over the longstanding con-
nection to the next  onion router. ACIs must be unique
on their longstanding connection but need not be glob-
ally unique. To move an onion through the system,
an onion router peels
off the outermost layer, identify-
ing the next hop. It checks the freshness (not expired
and  not replayed) of the onion, computes the neces-
sary cryptographic keys,  seeds the forward and back-
ward cryptographic engines, chooses
a new ACI for the
next hop in the new connection, and then builds a data
structure associated  with that connection which maps
incoming to outgoing ACIs and the cryptographic en-
gines associated  with forward and backward data.
The rest
of the onion is padded randomly to its orig-
inal length, placed into CREATE cells, and then sent
out in order to the appropriate neighbor. The payload
of the last cell is padded  with random bits to fill the
cell if necessary (to avoid traceability).
Data moves through an anonymous connection  in
DATA cells. At each onion router, except for the ini-
tiator’s, both the length and payload fields
of a cell are
crypted using the appropriate cryptographic engine.
The new cell is sent out to the appropriate neighbor.
The initiator’s onion router must repeatedly crypt data
to either add the appropriate layers of cryption on out-
going data,
or remove layers of cryption from incoming
data. When constructing  a DATA cell from
a plaintext
data stream, the cell is (partially) filled, its true length
50
is set, and all 45 bytes of the length and payload fields
are repeatedly crypted using the stream ciphers defined
by the onion.  Therefore, when the cell arrives
at the
responder  proxy, the length field reflects the length of
the actual data carried  in the payload.
If
a connection is broken, a DESTROY command
is sent to clean up state information. The ACI field
of the DESTROY command carries the ACI of the
broken connection. The length and payload must be
random. Upon  receipt of
a DESTROY command, it
is the responsibility of an onion router to forward the
DESTROY appropriately and to acknowledge receipt
by sending another DESTROY command back to the
previous sender.  After sending
a DESTROY command
about
a particular  ACI, an onion router may not send
any more cells along that anonymous connection.  Once
an acknowledgment DESTROY message is received, an
onion  routing node considers the anonymous connec-
tion destroyed and the ACI can be used as
a label for
a new anonymous connection.
The PADDING command is used to inject data into
a longstanding socket to further confuse traffic analysis.
PADDING cells are discarded upon receipt.
Each onion router also reorders cells moving through
it, according to
a scheme that we call layered reordering
(see section
6) that both preserves the order of cells in
each anonymous connection and  caps how long cells
may be delayed by an onion router.
5.7 Responder Proxy
When a routing node receives an onion with Desti-
nation Address
and Destination Port of 0, it knows it
is to act as
a responder proxy. It proceeds to read the
standard structure that will be the first data across the
anonymous socket connection, establishes
a connection
to the ultimate destination as indicated, and returns
the status code. After this, it will blindly forward data
between the anonymous connection and the connection
to the responder’s  machine.
6 Vulnerabilities
Onion routing is not invulnerable to traffic analysis
attacks. We now define an attack approach based on
several  simplifying assumptions. We characterize the
complexity
of an attack based on  these assumptions,
and note that real attacks will be more expensive. We
also note that any scheme resistant to traffic analysis
cannot increase the space of potential recipients
of a
message to more than the number of possible recipients
on the network.
So, expecting the complexity of traffic
analysis to be similar to the cost of brute force attack
on cryptographic algorithms (e.g.,
256) is unreasonable.
Furthermore, the cost of traffic analysis  searches may
be higher, since
a network must be monitored.
Assume that each  onion router has connections to
eight
(a3) other onion routers, and that each onion
router has
a secured  connection to a sensitive site. As-
sume that all anonymous connections pass through five
onion routers. Assume furthermore that since all cells
moving through an onion routing network are of fixed
length
(48 bytes) it is possible to identify  when cells
begin and end.
So we reduce the problem to track-
ing markers, where markers indicate the beginning of
a
cell. Assume further, that an attacker can start mon-
itoring the system when an onion router’s  incoming
queues and outgoing queues are empty,
so the attacker
can determine the order  in which markers  arrive at an
onion router.
Under these assumptions, tracking markers through
the network depends on the reordering done
at each
onion router. If no reordering is done (i.e., cells move
from incoming to outgoing queues using
a FIFO strat-
egy), then it appears easy to track  markers. The first
marker to reach on onion router will be the first to
leave, and  its route  through the network  can be fol-
lowed. But analysis is not that simple. Since each
onion router is both an onion routing proxy and an in-
termediate onion router,
a new marker may enter the
network at any time, and  it is impossible for an ob-
server to determine whether the new marker  arrived
before
or after the first marker on the incoming queues
(since a sensitive site’s connection to its onion router
is protected). If the onion routing proxy  is  busy, the
marker could end up on one of two outgoing queues. (If
the onion routing proxy is not busy, only one outgoing
queue will be active.) Under the most  complicating
conditions, a marker could ultimately end up in one of
25 outgoing queues.
To further complicate traffic analysis, onion routers
reorder incoming markers,
so data does not move
through the network  in
a simple FIFO manner. The
optimal goal would be
to make it equally likely that an
incoming marker is output on any of an onion router’s
8 outgoing queues. In that case, a single marker could
end  up
at one of (23)5 outgoing queues.  Notice that
we cannot improve on this number, since it defines all
possible reachable
 queue^.^
Since onion routing is meant for real-time communi-
cation, we use a limited amount of reordering. At any
5This does not imply that one can only  reach 215 sites via
onion routing. Since the  responder’s proxy can make connec-
tions
to any Internet site, one can anonymously browse any Web
site.
If the goal is to have anonymous connections between two
sensitive sites, then any one site can communicate with at most
212 other sensitive sites.
51
point in time, markers on several incoming queues may
be considered to arrive
at the same time. These mark-
ers may be moved to outgoing queues in any arbitrary
order that both maintains fairness of data movement
for every anonymous connection and preserves the or-
der of data on each anonymous connection.
We define  n-layered reordering as moving the first
n markers on each incoming queue to outgoing queues
in any arbitrary order subject to the order preserv-
ing  restriction just described. If an incoming queue
has fewer than
n markers, all markers  on the queue
are moved. (In 1-layer reordering, the order preserving
restriction is trivially satisfied.)  Notice that although
markers may be delayed at any particular onion router,
on average data latency is not hurt since markers are
equally likely to be forwarded early.
Using layered reordering, traffic analysis becomes
more complicated, since a marker could end up on one
of several output queues. However, imagine that we
know that two markers belong to the same anonymous
connection.
So, if  we know  which outgoing queues are
possible for each of the markers, the intersection of
those sets defines which queues are possible for the next
hop in the anonymous connection. The goal, therefore,
is
to choose a layered  reordering depth that makes it
very  likely that all  possible outgoing queues will be
present  in each
set most of the time.
Since data latency is not hurt by layered  reorder-
ing it is possible to predict the window during which a
marker is likely to exit the onion routing network. This
invites another kind of traffic analysk6
It should be
possible
to identify the near simultaneous opening of
endpoint connections. More specifically, if an attacker
wishes to confirm that two parties are communicating
frequently, if they happen to have many more simulta-
neous connection openings than is expected by chance,
they  are probably  communicating. This attack, how-
ever, is not possible if the onion routing basic config-
uration is only used  for communication between sites
that control onion routing proxies, since the connection
between the site and its onion router is assumed to be
protected. But, the basic  configuration  is not appro-
priate everywhere,
so this attack may persist in certain
scenarios.
7 Implementation Vulnerabilities
An implementation of a secure design can be inse-
cure.  In this section, we describe  several implementa-
tion decisions that were made for security considera-
tions.
6Thanks to John Kelsey for helpful comments on this point.
Onions are packaged in a sequence of cells that must
be processed together. This onion processing  involves
a
public key decryption operation which is relatively ex-
pensive. Therefore, it is possible to imagine an imple-
mentation that clears outgoing queues while an onion
is being processed, and then outputs the onion. There-
fore, any period of inactivity on the out-bound queues
is likely to be followed by
a sequence of onion cells be-
ing output on a single queue. Such an implementation
makes tracking easier and should be  avoided.
After  processing at each onion router, onions are
padded at the end to compensate
for the removed layer.
This padding  must be random, since onions are  not
link encrypted between  onion routers.  Similarly, the
length and payload of
a DESTROY command must be
new random content at each onion router; otherwise,
compromised onion routers could track that payload.
In
a multi-threaded implementation, there is a sig-
nificant lure to rely upon the apparent scheduling ran-
domness to reorder  events. If reordering
is important
to the secure operation of the system,  deliberate re-
ordering is crucial, since low level system randomness
may in fact be predictable.
There  are two vulnerabilities that we do not yet
know how to address. If part
of the onion routing net-
work is taken down, traffic analysis is greatly simplified.
Also, if
a longstanding connection between two onion
routers is broken,  it will result in many DESTROY
messages, one for each anonymous connection that was
routed through that longstanding connection. There-
fore,
a compromised onion router may infer from near
simultaneous DESTROY messages that the associated
anonymous connections had some common route. De-
laying DESTROY messages hurts performance, since
we require that
a DESTROY message propagate to the
endpoints
to take down the connection that is  visible
to the user. Carrying the DESTROY message through
the anonymous connection and garbage collecting dor-
mant anonymous connections later would be ideal, but
we do not know how to efficiently insert control infor-
mation into
a raw data channel, especially considering
our layered en~ryption.~
8 Related Work
Chaum [3] defines a layered object that routes data
through  intermediate nodes, called
mixes. These in-
70ne could imagine sending control information by insert-
ing some random cell into the data stream. The application or
its proxy could detect corrupted data, and terminate at the ap-
plication level, without destroying the anonymous connection.
However, this
is risky for two reasons: it may not always be pos-
sible to detect corrupted data, and a random inserted cell may
appear uncorrupted.
52
termediate nodes may reorder, delay, and  pad traffic
to complicate traffic analysis.
Our onion routers  are
throughout the Internet, which improves hiding.
based on mixes. Some work has been done using mixes
in ATM networks
[5].
9 ~~~~l~~i~~
Anonymous Remailers like [7, 111 use mixes to pro-
vide anonymous e-mail services. Some invent an ad-
dress through which mail can be forwarded back to the
original sender.  Remailers work in
a store and forward
manner
at the mail application  layer, by stripping off
headers at each mix and forwarding the mail message
to the next mix. Some remailers  provide confirmation
of delivery.
In
[9], a structure similar to an onion is  used to
forward individual IP packets through
a network. By
maintaining tracking information at each router, ICMP
error  messages  can be moved  back along the hidden
route. Essentially,
a connection is built for each packet
in
a connectionless service.
In
[12], mixes are used to provide untraceable com-
munication in an ISDN network. As described there, in
an ISDN system, each ISDN line is assigned to
a partic-
ular local switch (i.e., local exchange), and switches are
interconnected by
a (long distance) network. Anony-
mous calls in ISDN  rely upon  an  anonymous connec-
tion within each switch between the caller and the long
distance  network, which is obtained by routing calls
through a predefined  series of mixes. The long distance
endpoints of the connection are then mated to complete
the call. (Notice that observers  can  tell which local
switches are connected.) This approach relies upon two
unique features of ISDN switches as described  in
[la].
Since each ISDN line has a subset of the switch’s total
capacity pre-allocated to it, there is no (real) cost  as-
sociated with keeping an ISDN line active all the time,
either by making calls to itself, to other ISDN lines
on the same switch,
or to the long distance  network.
Keeping ISDN lines active complicates traffic analysis
because an observer cannot  track coincidences.
Since each ISDN line has
a control  circuit connec-
tion to the switch, the switch can broadcast messages
to each line  using these control circuits.
So, within
a switch a truly anonymous connection  can be estab-
lished: An  ISDN line makes an anonymous connection
to some mix. That mix broadcasts
a token identify-
ing itself and the connection. A recipient of that token
can make another anonymous connection to the speci-
fied mix, which mates the two connections to complete
the circuit.  In  anonymous ISDN, the mixes hide com-
munication  within the local switch, but connections
between switches are  not hidden. This implies that
all calls between  two  businesses,  each large enough
to
use an entire switch, would reveal which businesses are
communicating. In onion routing, mixing is dispersed
Anonymous socket connections  provide protection
against both eavesdropping and traffic analysis.
Al-
though our focus  is  on anonymous connections, and
not anonymous communication, anonymous communi-
cation is also possible by removing identifying informa-
tion from the data stream. Onion routing’s anonymous
connections are application independent and can inter-
face with unmodified Internet applications by means of
proxies.
Our implementation of onion routing includes
proxies  for  Web browsing, e-mail, and remote login.
We have also implemented anonymizing versions of the
Web and e-mail proxies.
It is instructive to compare onion routing’s anony-
mous e-mail service with other anonymous remailers.
All  services  remove identifying  headers. Most remail-
ers work in
a store and forward manner, either between
mixes
or simply  sendmail  daemons. Onion  routing’s
service, however, makes an anonymous connection di-
rectly to the recipient’s sendmail daemon. This has
both advantages and disadvantages. The disadvantage
is that mixing is not done as well, since the connection
is made in real time. The advantage is that the anony-
mous connection  is separated from the application,
so
anonymous e-mail systems are considerably simplified
because the application specific part does not have to
move data through the network. Furthermore, because
the onion routing network  can carry  many  types of
data, it has the potential to be more heavily utilized
than
a network that is devoted  only to e-mail. Heavy
utilization is the key to anonymity.
Anonymous remailers typically provide
a mechanism
to reply to anonymous e-mail.
A remailer may assign
pseudonyms through which mail is forwarded.  These
pseudonyms must be stored at the remailer in order to
properly process replies. In onion routing, it is possi-
ble  for
a sender to build a reply onion that defines an
anonymous connection to him. This reply  onion  can
be included in mail messages. When
a response is sent
to the appropriate proxy  on an onion router, the re-
ply onion is  first processed to create the anonymous
connection back to the sender. The reply is then sent
over that anonymous  connection. Notice that the re-
ply onion  is  equivalent to
a pseudonym, except that
it is not  stored
at any onion router. So onion routers
are stateless remailers. To identify users of anonymous
onion routed e-mail, reply onions must first be obtained
and all relevant onion routers must be compromised.
Anonymous connections may be used as a new prim-
itive that enables novel applications in addition to
fa-
53
cilitating secure  versions of existing services. For  ex-
ample, in
a cellular phone system, the location of hand-
sets must be tracked, even  when the phone is waiting
for a call (in standby mode). This is because the cellu-
lar network must know through which base station to
route calls. However, it may be undesirable to let the
cellular  network know the location of its subscribers.
An alternative architecture that protects such location
information, may be constructed using anonymous con-
nections. To make a call, the phone constructs an onion
which  defines
a route  through the local  base station
to some billing station. The phone identifies the sub-
scriber
to the billing station (for billing purposes) but
does not have to reveal its location. The billing sta-
tion completes the call. To receive
a call, the handset
is  paged over a  large area. This paging turns on the
handset, which then makes
a call to the paged num-
ber (through an anonyrnous connection as described
above). As an aside, the paging approach to receiv-
ing a call significantly conserves battery use, since the
phone is
off unless it is involved in a call.
Alternatives to the basic  configuration  exist which
move trust closer to the user. For example, an Inter-
net Services Provider (ISP) could run an onion router
that accepts onions from its subscribers.  Subscribers
would generate these onions on their trusted local ma-
chines. The ISP would not know with whom the cus-
tomer is communicating. And the subscriber need not
fully trust the
ISP to maintain his privacy.
Acknowledgments
We were helped by discussions with many peo-
ple including Ran Atkinson,  Markus Jakobbsen, John
Kelsey, John McLean, Cathy Meadows, Andy  Moore,
Moni Naor, Holger Peterson, Birgit Pfitzmann, Michael
Steiner, and James Washington. We thank the anony-
mous referees  for helpful suggestions. We thank the
Isaac Newton Institute, Cambridge. Some of these dis-
cussions were conducted while one
of the authors was
in residence there. The fast  UltraSparc implementa-
tion
of RSA was done by Tolga Acar and Cetin  Kaya
KOG. This work was supported by ONR.
References
[l] The Anonymizer. http: //www. anonymizer. com
[2] T. Acar, B. S. Kaliski, Jr., and C. KO$. Analyzing
and Comparing Montgomery Multiplication Algo-
rithms,
IEEE Micro, 16(3):26-33, June 1996.
[3] D. Chaum. Untraceable  Electronic  Mail, Return
Addresses, and Digital Pseudonyms,
Communica-
tions
of the ACM, v. 24, n. 2, Feb. 1981, pp. 84-88.
[4] D. Chaum, The Dining Cryptographers Problem:
Unconditional Sender and Recipient  Untraceabil-
ity,
Journal of Cryptology, 1/1, 1988, pp. 65-75.
[5]
S. Chuang. Security Management of ATM Net-
works, Ph.D. thesis, in progress, Cambridge Uni-
versity.
[6] D. E. Comer.
Internetworking  with TCP/IP,
Volume 1: Principles, Protocols, and Architec-
ture,
Prentice-Hall, Engelwood  Cliffs, New Jersey,
1995.
[7] L. Cottrell.
Mixmaster and Remailer  Attacks,
http://obscura.obscura.com/'loki/remailer
/remailer-essay.htm1
[8] Whitfield Diffie, Paul C. van Oorschot, and
Michael J. Wiener. Authentication and Authenti-
cated Key Exchanges.
Designs,  Codes, and Cryp-
tography,
2:107-125, 1992.
[9] A.  Fasbender, D. Kesdogan,
0. Kubitz. Variable
and Scalable Security: Protection of Location
Information in Mobile
IP, 46th IEEE Vehicular
Technology Society Conference,
Atlanta, March
1996.
[lo] D. Goldschlag,  M. Reed,  P. Syverson.  Hiding
Routing  Information, in
Information Hiding, R.
Anderson, ed., LNCS vol. 1174, Springer-Verlag,
1996, pp. 137-150.
[Ill C. Giilcu and G. Tsudik. Mixing Email with Ba-
bel, 1996 Symposium on Network and Distributed
System Security,
San Diego, February 1996.
[la] A. Pfitzmann, B. Pfitzmann,  and M. Waidner.
ISDN-Mixes: Untraceable Communication with
Very Small Bandwidth  Overhead,
GI/ITG Con-
ference: Communication in Distributed Systems,
Mannheim Feb,  1991, Informatik-Fachberichte
267, Springer-Verlag,  Heildelberg  1991, pp. 451-
463.
[13] M. G. Reed, P. F. Syverson, and D. M. Goldschlag.
Proxies for Anonymous Routing,
Proc. 12th An-
nual Computer Security  Applications  Conference,
San Diego, CA, IEEE CS Press,  December, 1996,
pp. 95-104.
[14] B. Schneier.
Applied Cryptography: Protocols, Al-
gorithms and Source Code in C,
John Wiley and
Sons, 1994.
54
Anonymous Connections and Onion Routing
Paul F. Syverson, David M. Goldschlag, and Michael G. Reed *
Naval Research Laboratory
Abstract
Onion Routing  provides anonymous connections
that are strongly resistant to both eavesdropping
and
trajgic analysis. Unmodified Internet applications can
use these anonymous connections by means of prox-
ies. The proxies
may also make communication anony-
mous
by removing identifying information from the
data stream. Onion routing has been implemented
on
Sun Solaris
2.X with proxies for Web browsing, remote
logins,
and e-mail. This paper’s contribution is a de-
tailed  specification
of the implemented  onion routing
system, a vulnerability analysis based on this specifica-
tion, and performance results.
1 Introduction
Private electronic communication is becoming an in-
creasingly important public issue. Encryption can ef-
fectively hide the content of a conversation from eaves-
droppers, and this protection is being integrated into
many systems. But, hiding the identities
of communi-
cating parties from eavesdroppers,
or from each other,
is usually not considered.
Who is communicating with whom, however, may
be sensitive too. E-mail users may wish to hide their
addresses. Anonymous  cash is not anonymous if the
communications channel identifies the purchaser. The
amount of information revealed through Web  brows-
ing should be deliberate.  Inter-company  collaboration
may be  confidential.  Revealing identities in
a cellular
phone system reveals
a user’s location, since the cellu-
A purpose of traffic analysis is to reveal who is talk-
ing
to whom. The
anonymous connections described
here are designed to be resistant to traffic analysis, i.e.,
to make it difficult for observers to learn identifying in-
lar phone network must track handsets’ locations.
*Address: Naval Research Laboratory, Center For High As-
surance Computer Systems, Washington, D.C. 20375-5337, USA,
phone: +1 202.767.2389, fax: +1 202.404.7942, e-mail: {last
n a m e} Qi t d .nrl .nav y.mil .
formation from the connection (e.g., by reading packet
headers,
tracking encrypted  payloads, etc.). Any iden-
tifying information must be passed as data through
the anonymous connections.
Our implementation of
anonymous connections,
onion routing, provides  pro-
tection against eavesdropping as  a side effect. Onion
routing provides  bidirectional and near real-time com-
munication similar to TCP/IP socket connections
[6].
The anonymous connections  can substitute for sockets
in
a wide variety of unmodified Internet  applic-t’ a lOnS
by means of proxies. The proxies may also  remove
identifying information from the data stream, to make
too.
Although onion routing  may be used
for anony-
mous communication, it differs from anonymous re-
mailers
[7, 111 in two  ways: Communication is  real-
time and bidirectional, and the anonymous connections
are application independent. Onion routing’s  anony-
mous connections  can support anonymous mail as well
as other applications.
For example, onion routing may
be used for anonymous Web browsing. A user may
wish to browse public Web sites without revealing his
identity to those Web sites. That requires removing
information that identifies him from
his requests to
Web servers, and removing information  from the con-
nection itself that may identify him. Hence, anony-
mous Web browsing uses anonymized  communication
over anonymous connections. The Anonymizer
[l] only
anonymizes the data stream, not the connection  itself.
So it does not prevent traffic analysis attacks like track-
ing data as it moves through the network.
A preliminary description of onion routing is found
in
[lo, 131. Those  papers  mainly present the goals of
onion routing, and some of the basic structure
of
our
solution. However, they do not give enough detail to
properly  evaluate the security of onion routing. The
original content of this paper includes:
a detailed spec-
ification
of the onion routing system; a description of
implementation choices that were influenced by con-
siderations not apparent
at a more abstract level; a
vulnerability analysis based on the specification; and
performance  results
for our prototype. The specifi-
44
U.S. Government Work Not Protected by U.S. Copyright
