On the Indiﬀerentiability of the Sponge
Construction
Guido Bertoni 1, Joan Daemen 1, Micha¨ el Peeters2, and Gilles V an Assche 1
sponge@noekeon.org
1 STMicroelectronics
2 NXP Semiconductors
Abstract. In this paper we prove that the sponge construction intro-
duced in [4] is indiﬀerentiable from a random oracle when bei ng used
with a random transformation or a random permutation and dis cuss its
implications. T o our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst time indiﬀe rentiability
has been shown for a construction calling a random permutati on (in-
stead of an ideal compression function or ideal block cipher ) and for a
construction generating outputs of any length (instead of a ﬁxed length).
1 Introduction
All cryptographic hash functions of any signiﬁcance known t oday , i.e., MD4,
MD5, the SHA and RIPEMD [15] families and several others, sha re the same
design paradigm. They all consist of the iterated applicati on of a compression
function. The iteration mechanism is known as Merkle-Damg ˚ ard [8, 16] and guar-
antees that if the compression function is collision-resis tant, the resulting hash
function is collision-resistant. This is a very attractive property as collision-
resistance appears to be one of the most important propertie s of cryptographic
hash functions. The compression functions of the above ment ioned hash func-
tions were designed with collision-resistance in mind. Dur ing the last years, with
the recent collision attacks on SHA-1 as culminating point, it has become clear
that designing a compression function that is both collisio n-resistant and eﬃ-
cient is not an easy task. Moreover, weaknesses have been sho wn in the Merkle-
Damg ˚ ard construction itself. While it does guarantee cert ain properties such as
collision-resistance on the condition that the underlying compression function
has the same property , this is not the case for all properties that are expected
from cryptographic hash functions. A well known example of s uch a weakness,
discussed in [7], is the insecurity of the MAC function const ructed from a Merkle-
Damg ˚ ard hash function by feeding the latter with the secret key followed by the
message.
In [7] Coron et al. propose a number of variants of the Merkle- Damg ˚ ard
construction that do not have this and other weaknesses. F or each of these con-
structions they provide theorems stating that if the compre ssion function is
constructed using an ideal component, i.e., a ﬁnite input le ngth (FIL) random
oracle or an ideal block cipher (used as Davies-Meyer compre ssion function), the
hash function behaves as a random oracle [3] with output trun cated to a ﬁxed
length. They present their theorems in the indiﬀerentiabil ity framework that was
introduced by Maurer et al. in [14]. As a (truncated) random o racle has all de-
sired properties that may be expected from a cryptographic h ash function, this
provides a direction for the design of hash functions that do not only provide re-
sistance against collision search, but are as strong as a tru ncated random oracle
with respect to many criteria. Instead of constructing an eﬃ cient compression
function that is collision-resistant, one shall now design an eﬃcient function that
behaves as a FIL random oracle, or in other words, a random n + m to n bit
compression function, or an ideal block cipher. In the meanw hile, several other
hash function constructions have been shown to be indiﬀeren tiable from a ran-
dom oracle, see for example [2, 6]. Note that indiﬀerentiabi lity is not the only
approach to proving properties of hash function constructi ons: some authors an-
alyze the properties of the compression function that can be preserved by the
construction [1, 2].
Recently , we introduced a new iterative hash function const ruction, called
a sponge [4]. It builds upon a ﬁxed-length transformation (i .e., with codomain
equal to domain) or permutation f instead of a compression function and can
generate output strings of inﬁnite length. In [4] we proved t hat when f is a
random transformation or permutation, the resulting funct ion is only distin-
guishable from a random oracle with probability below N (N + 1) / 2c+1, where
N is the number of calls to f (and f − 1) and c is a security parameter related to
the size of the domain of f . At ﬁrst sight, one may consider the indistinguisha-
bility proof as an argument that it behaves as a random oracle with probability
1 − N (N + 1)/ 2c+1. However, this is restricted to adversaries that can only qu ery
the sponge function and not f (and f − 1). In a concrete hash function, f is pub-
licly speciﬁed and this is of limited interest. W e also inclu ded computations of
the complexity of a number of so-called critical operations and discussed how this
impacts the classical properties expected from hash functi ons such as collision-
resistance and (2nd)-preimage resistance. However, this d oes not result in lower
bounds for the security of these properties but rather upper bounds to the reach-
able security level. In this paper we apply the approach of [7 ] to the sponge con-
struction and demonstrate that the advantage of an adversar y in diﬀerentiating
the sponge construction from a random oracle is about N (N + 1) / 2c+1 if the
underlying f is a random transformation and an even smaller upper bound if it
is a random permutation.
As discussed above, this implies that the sponge constructi on when calling a
random transformation or permutation has all properties of a random oracle as
long as c is large enough. Hence we are now able to provide the security bounds
for collision-resistance and (2nd)-preimage resistance t hat are lacking in [4].
There are several iterative hash function constructions th at have been shown
to be indiﬀerentiable from a random oracle. However, the spo nge construction
has two unique features. First, it can generate long outputs . While other con-
structions can only behave as a random oracle whose output ha s been truncated
to a ﬁxed length, a random sponge does not have this limitatio n and may also
2
serve as a reference for stream ciphers. Second, it can be bui lt using a permu-
tation, where both f and f − 1 can be queried by the adversary . Paradoxically ,
collision-resistance and (2nd)-preimage resistance can b e realized by employing
a function that is easy to invert.
In [4] our main goal was to deﬁne a reference for security prop erties of hash
designs. With our indiﬀerentiability result, we prove that the resistance of the
sponge construction calling a random transformation or per mutation is as good
as that of a random oracle, lower bounded by about N (N + 1) / 2c+1. This coin-
cides with what is presented in [4] as the ﬂat sponge claim . Despite our original
intention in [4], we argue that the sponge construction can l ead to practical
hash function designs. First of all, as mentioned in [4], the support for long
outputs is a useful feature for a hash function when being use d as a mask gener-
ating function (MGF) or a key derivation function (KDF). Sec ond, instead of a
collision-resistant compression function (Merkle-Damg ˚ ard) or a random-looking
compression function or ideal block cipher (as in [7]), it ta kes the design of a
random-looking permutation. As a good block cipher should b ehave as a set of
(independent and) random-looking permutations, hash func tion design can now
beneﬁt from insights gained in block cipher design. However , as opposed to a
block cipher, a permutation has no key schedule and has not th e concerns that
come with it such as its computational overhead and possible related-key weak-
nesses. This makes in our opinion the sponge construction a v ery interesting
alternative to the constructions based on a compression fun ction.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a short
introduction to indiﬀerentiability applied to hash functi on constructions and is
followed by Section 3 that deﬁnes and discusses the sponge co nstruction in the
indiﬀerentiability setting. Section 4 gives the actual pro ofs and ﬁnally Section 5
discusses its implications.
2 Indiﬀerentiability from a random oracle
Indiﬀerentiability deals with the interaction between sys tems where the objective
is to show that two systems cannot be told apart by an adversar y able to query
both systems but not knowing a priori which system is which. F or hash function
constructions, a random oracle serves as an ideal system.
W e use the deﬁnition of random oracle from [3]. A random oracl e, denoted
RO, takes as input binary strings of any length and returns for e ach input a
random inﬁnite string, i.e., it is a map from Z∗
2 to Z∞
2 , chosen by selecting each
bit of RO(x) uniformly and independently , for every x. In [7] and other papers
on the subject, one does not consider indiﬀerentiability fr om a random oracle,
but rather a random oracle with output truncated to a ﬁxed num ber of bits.
The indiﬀerentiability framework was introduced by Maurer et al. in [14]
and is an extension of the classical notion of indistinguish ability . Coron et al.
applied it to iterated hash function constructions in [7] an d demonstrated for
a number of iterated hash function constructions that they a re indiﬀerentiable
from a random oracle if the compression function is a random F IL oracle. In
3
Fig. 1. The diﬀerentiability setup
this section we give a brief introduction to these subjects; for a more in-depth
treatment, we refer to the original papers.
In the context of iterated hashing the adversary shall disti nguish between two
systems that each have two components, as illustrated in Fig ure 1. The system
at the left is the combination of the ideal compression funct ion F and the hash
function construction C. The adversary can make queries to both components
separately , where the latter in turn calls the former to cons truct its responses.
This is denoted by C[F]. These are the two diﬀerent interfaces to the system to
the left.
The system at the right consists of a random oracle (with trun cated output)
RO providing the same interface as C[F]. T o be indiﬀerentiable from the system
at the left, the system at the right also needs a subsystem oﬀe ring the same
interface to the adversary as the ideal compression functio n F. This is called a
simulator P and its role is to simulate the ideal compression function F so that
no distinguisher can tell whether it is interacting with the system at the left or
with the one at the right. The output of P should look consistent with what the
distinguisher can obtain from the random oracle RO as if P was F and RO was
C[F]. T o achieve that, the simulator can query the random oracle , denoted by
P[RO]. Note that the simulator does not see the distinguisher’s q ueries to the
random oracle.
Indiﬀerentiability of C[F] from a random oracle RO is now satisﬁed if there
exists a simulator P such that no distinguisher can tell the two systems apart
with non-negligible probability , based on their responses to queries it may send.
W e repeat here the deﬁnition as given in [7] where the hash fun ction construction
is called T uring machine C, the ideal compression function is called ideal primitive
F and the random oracle is called ideal primitive G.
Deﬁnition 1 ([7]). A Turing machine C with oracle access to an ideal primitive
F is said to be (tD , t S , q, ϵ ) indiﬀerentiable from an ideal primitive G if there
4
Fig. 2. The padded sponge construction
exists a simulator P[G], such that for any distinguisher D it holds that:
|Pr [ D[C[F], F] = 1] − Pr [ D[G, P[G]] = 1] |< ϵ. (1)
The simulator has oracle access to G and runs in time at most tS . The distin-
guisher runs in time at most tD and makes at most q queries. Similarly, C[F]
is said to be indiﬀerentiable from G if ϵ is a negligible function of the security
parameter k.
Now, it is shown in [14] that if C[F] is indiﬀerentiable from a random oracle,
then C[F] can replace the random oracle in any cryptosystem, and the r esulting
cryptosystem is at least as secure in the ideal compression f unction model as in
the random oracle model. This is much stronger than the indis tinguishability of
C[F] from a random oracle, which just merely means that an attack er that can
query C[F], but has no direct access to F, cannot distinguish it from a random
oracle. As said, for hash function constructions indisting uishability makes little
sense as, for any concrete hash function, the compression fu nction F is public
and hence accessible to the adversary .
3 The sponge construction
3.1 Deﬁnition
In this section we deﬁne the sponge construction. Our deﬁnit ion is a special case
of the more general deﬁnition in [4]. T o simplify the present ation, we restrict
the input and output of the sponge to binary strings instead o f a more general
alphabet. Our indiﬀerentiability result can however easil y be extended to the
generic deﬁnition. The (padded) sponge construction is ill ustrated in Figure 2.
In the sequel, we generally denote by x a message in Z∗
2, and by p a sequence
of blocks of r bits each (i.e., p ∈ Zr
2
∗), indexed from 0 to |p| −1, with |p|the
number of r-bit blocks of p.
Deﬁnition 2. For positive integers r, c , a sponge function S[F] maps binary
strings with length a multiple of r to binary strings of any requested length, i.e.,
Zr
2
∗ to Z∞
2 . A sponge calls a transformation F operating on Zr+c
2 = Zr
2 × Zc
2
as described in Algorithm 1. Here c is called the capacity and r is called the
5
bitrate3 of the sponge. The (group) operation ⊕ denotes the bitwise addition of
r-bit blocks and 0r is the all-zero block, the neutral element of this group. The
input p to a sponge function must consist of one or more blocks and sha ll not
have 0r as last block, i.e., |p|> 0 and p|p|−1 ̸= 0 r .
Algorithm 1 The sponge construction S[F]
Input p = p0p1 . . . p |p|− 1 and requested length n
Require: |p| ≥ 1 and p|p|− 1 ̸= 0 r
Output z ∈ Zn
2
s = ( sa, s c) = (0 r , 0c )
for i = 0 to |p| −1 do
(sa, s c) = F(sa ⊕ pi, s c)
end for
for i = 0 to ⌈n
r ⌉ − 1 do
Append sa to the output
(sa, s c) = F(sa, s c)
end for
Discard the last r⌈n
r ⌉ − n bits
3.2 Graph representation of sponge operation
In [4] we used a graph representation to prove bounds on succe ss probability of
generating collisions. W e adopt this graph representation in the speciﬁcation of
our simulators. In our discussions on the graphs, we need to c learly distinguish
between the ﬁrst r bits and the last c bits of an r + c-bit variable s. F or this, we
again use the notation of [4]: A = Zr
2 and C = Zc
2 and we call the ﬁrst r bits of
s its A-part sa, and the last c bits its C-part sc.
W e consider the transformation F as a directed graph whose vertex set (called
nodes) is A × C and whose edges are ( s, F(s)). It has both 2 r+c nodes and edges.
F rom the node graph, we derive the (directed) supernode grap h, with vertex set
(called supernodes) equal to C. In this graph, an edge ( sc, t c) is in the edge set if
and only if ∃sa, t a such that (( sa, s c), (ta, t c)) is an edge in the node graph. The
set of supernodes is a partition of the nodes where a supernod e contains the 2 r
nodes with the same C-part.
The sponge construction operates on a chaining variable s and its operation
can be seen as a walk through the node graph of the chaining var iable. W e denote
the chaining variable before processing pi by si. Its initial value is s0 = (0 r , 0c).
Then for each block pi, it performs a two-step transition. First, it moves to the
node s′ within the same supernode with s′a = si, a ⊕ pi, and then it follows the
edge starting from s′, arriving in si+1. After processing all blocks of p it is in
3 The bitrate r is not to be confused with rate meaning the number of block cip her
calls it takes to implement the compression function, as in, e.g., [12].
6
node s|p|. Then it gives out the A-part of s|p| as z0. F or each additional block zi
produced, it follows the edge from s|p|+i− 1 arriving in s|p|+i and gives out the
A-part of the latter as zi. Note that this can be considered a special case of the
above two-step transition if we extend p with blocks p|p|+i = 0 r for all i ≥ 0.
Clearly , the chaining variable si is completely determined by the ﬁrst i blocks
of p. W e call this a path to si. Or more exactly:
Deﬁnition 3 ([4]). First, the empty string is a path to the node (0r , 0c). Then,
if p is a path to node s = ( sa, s c) and there is an edge ((sa ⊕ a, s c), t ) in the node
graph, p′ = pa is a path to node t.
Note that although a path completely determines a node, ther e may be many
paths to a node.
It follows from the above that zj of z = S[F](p) is the A-part of the node
with path p0rj . And so, given a path p (diﬀerent from 0 rj ) to a node s, one
can ﬁnd its A-part by a call to the sponge construction. W e have sa = zj with
z = S[F](p′) and p′ and j given by p = p′0rj such that p′ is a valid sponge input,
i.e., |p′|> 0 and p′
|p′|−1 ̸= 0 r . F or a path of form 0 rj there is no such p′ and
hence the sponge construction cannot be queried to obtain sa.
3.3 The padded sponge construction
The sponge construction S[F](p) only supports input strings p ∈ Zr
2
∗ where p is
not the empty string and has last block diﬀerent from 0 r . T o allow the input to
be any binary string in Z∗
2, one needs to deﬁne an injective mapping pad( x) that
converts any binary string x to a valid sponge input. The simplest such mapping
pad(x) consists in padding the string with a single bit 1 and a numbe r w of
zeroes with 0 ≤ w < r so that pad( x) contains a multiple of r bits. T o indicate
the sponge construction including the padding operation, w e use the symbol S′:
S′[F](x) ≜ S[F](pad(x)).
3.4 The distinguisher’s setting
W e give proofs of indiﬀerentiability for the cases that F is a random trans-
formation or a random permutation. A random transformation (permutation)
operating on a certain domain is a transformation selected r andomly and uni-
formly from all transformations (permutations) operating on that domain.
The adversary shall distinguish between two systems using t heir responses
to sequences of queries. At the left is the system ( S′[F], F). The padded sponge
construction S′[F] provides one interface denoted by H, taking a binary string
x ∈ Z∗
2 and an integer n and returning a binary string y ∈ Zn
2 , the sponge output
truncated to n bits. If F is a random transformation it has a single interface
F1 which takes as input an element s of Zr+c
2 and returns t = F(s), an element
of the same set. If F is a random permutation, it has an additional interface
F− 1 that implements the inverse of F. Note that the sponge construction in
Algorithm 1 only uses the interface F1.
7
At the right is the system ( RO, P[RO]). It oﬀers the same interface as the
left system, i.e., RO provides the interface H and returns an output truncated
to the requested length. W e deﬁne two simulators, one for the case of a ran-
dom transformation and another one for the case of a random pe rmutation.
The transformation simulator provides a single interface F1. The permutation
simulator provides both interfaces F1 and F− 1.
Let X be either ( S′[F], F) or ( RO, P[RO]). The sequence of queries Q to X
consist of a sequence of queries to the interface H, denoted Q0 and a sequence of
queries to the interface F1 (and F− 1), denoted Q1. Q0 is a sequence of couples
(x, n ), with x ∈ Z∗
2 and n a positive integer. Q1 is a sequence of couples ( s, b )
with s ∈ Zr+c
2 and b either 1 or −1, indicating whether the interface F1 or F− 1
is addressed. In the case that F is a transformation, b is restricted to 1.
3.5 The cost of queries
Deﬁnition 1 suggests expressing an upper bound to the advant age of a distin-
guisher in terms of the number of queries q. The bounds provided in [7] however
also make use of parameter ℓ , the maximum input length of the queries. In our
bounds we use another measure for the query complexity which is more natural
when applied to the sponge construction. W e call this measur e cost and denote
it by N . The cost N of queries to a system X is the total number of calls to F
or F− 1 it would yield if X = ( F, S′[F]), either directly due to queries Q1, or
indirectly via queries Q0 to S′[F]. The cost of a sequence of queries is fully de-
termined by their number and their input and output lengths. Each query to F1
or F− 1 contributes 1 to the cost. A query to H with an ℓ -bit input contributes
⌊ℓ
r ⌋+ ⌈n
r ⌉to the cost (assuming the simple padding of Section 3.3 is use d). Our
bounds in terms of cost are comparable to those of [7]: for a ﬁx ed output size,
as considered in [7], N is an aﬃne function of q and qℓ .
In the sequel, we consider the indiﬀerentiability as in Deﬁn ition 1 but with
the cost N replacing the number of queries q and their maximum length ℓ .
4 Indiﬀerentiability proofs
4.1 The simulators we use in our proofs
W e deﬁne simulators for the case that F is a random transformation and for the
case of a random permutation. In both cases, the simulator sh ould behave as a
deterministic function and give responses to queries Q1 that in combination with
the responses to queries Q0 to the random oracle shall minimize the probability
that the system ( RO, P[RO]) can be distinguished from a system ( S′[F], F). In
this section we informally explain how our simulators work.
A simulator keeps track of the queries it received and the res ponses it returned
in a graph, very similar to the graphs discussed in Section 3. 2. The only diﬀerence
is that initially the simulator graph has no edges and for eac h new query F1(s)
(or F− 1(s)) the simulator generates a response t and adds the edge ( s, t ) (or
8
Fig. 3. Example of simulator graph. The rooted supernodes are in bol d. Paths are
indicated in italic next to the nodes having a path.
(t, s )). Note that using the responses of the simulator to its quer ies, the adversary
can fully reconstruct the simulator graph.
In order to motivate the design of the simulators, we now disc uss properties
of this graph that it has at any moment during or after the quer ies, using an
example depicted in Figure 3.
F or a subset of the nodes in the simulator graph, the adversar y knows a path.
F rom Deﬁnition 3, it is clear that these are the nodes that hav e an incoming edge
and are in a supernode that can be reached from supernode 0 c by following the
directed edges from supernode to supernode. F or this purpos e, we deﬁne the set
of rooted supernodes R as the subset of C containing 0 c and all the supernodes
accessible from it through the supernode graph. By extensio n, we say that a node
s = ( sa, s c) is rooted if sc ∈ R. So the adversary knows paths to all rooted nodes
that have an incoming edge from another rooted node, plus the empty path of
9
the (0 r , 0c) node. F or each of these rooted nodes it can query the interfa ce H
of the system hoping to reveal an inconsistency , which is evi dence that it is not
(S′[F], F). W e call sponge-consistent the responses to a sequence of queries Q
that do not result in such inconsistency .
W e will now explain why our simulators generate sponge-cons istent responses
(up to 2 c queries Q1). Whenever a simulator receives a query F1(s) with s rooted,
it will result in an image t with known path. Therefore, the simulator constructs
the A-part of t to be sponge-consistent by querying RO using the path to t
(except for the all-zero path). When the simulator receives a query F1(s) with
s not rooted, no path to the image t is known and it chooses t randomly from
all the nodes (with no incoming edge, if F is a random permutation).
The idea is that the simulators are designed so that a call to F1(s) results only
in the path of a single node becoming known, that of t = F(s) if s is rooted.
F or that, when selecting tc for a rooted node s, they exclude the supernodes
with outgoing edges (cases a and c in Figure 3). Additionally , they avoid the
occurrence of nodes with multiple paths. F or that, when sele cting tc for a rooted
node s, they exclude the rooted supernodes (case b in Figure 3) and those with
outgoing edges (case c in Figure 3). The permutation simulator avoids paths of
nodes becoming known as a result of a call to F− 1(s) altogether by excluding
rooted supernodes when selecting tc.
Let O be the set of supernodes with an outgoing edge. When the simul ator
receives a query F1(s) with s a rooted node and all supernodes are rooted or have
an outgoing edge, i.e., if R ∪ O = C, it can no longer ensure sponge-consistency
and we call the simulator saturated. As every query to the simulator adds at
most one edge and that hence R ∪ O can be extended by at most 1 per query ,
this cannot happen before 2 c queries.
4.2 When being used with a random transformation
The simulator for the case that F is a random transformation is given in Algo-
rithm 2. W e prove the indiﬀerentiability by means of a series of lemmas and a
ﬁnal theorem.
Lemma 1. To every node in the simulator graph there is at most one path,
unless the simulator is saturated.
Proof. First, we show that the rooted supernodes in the supernode gr aph form a
tree. When no edges exist, this is indeed the case. The only wa y to create a new
rooted node is by calling F1(s) with s rooted. Assuming the simulator is not
saturated, this happens only in ﬁrst part of Algorithm 2 (lin es 4–12), if s is rooted
and has no outgoing edge. The new edge only adds a single super node to R as
the simulator selects it from the supernodes with no outgoin g edges. Moreover,
the new edge cannot arrive in a rooted supernode (because the simulator selects
tc from C \ R) or in a supernode from which a rooted supernode can be reache d
(because the simulator select tc from the supernodes with no outgoing edges).
10
Algorithm 2 The transformation simulator P[RO]
1: Interface F1 , taking node s as input
2: if node s has no outgoing edge then
3: if node s is rooted AND R ∪ O ̸= C (no saturation) then
4: Construct path to t: ﬁnd path to s, append sa and call the result p
5: Write p as p = p′0rj where p′ does not end with 0 r
6: if p′ can be unpadded into x then
7: Assign to ta the value zj with z = RO(x)
8: else
9: Choose ta randomly and uniformly
10: end if
11: Choose tc randomly and uniformly from C \ (R ∪ O)
12: Let t = ( ta, t c)
13: else
14: Choose t randomly and uniformly from all nodes
15: end if
16: Add an edge from s to t
17: end if
18: return the node t at the end of the outgoing edge from s
Then, for two connected supernodes ( sc, t c), there exists only one edge in
the simulator graph of the form (( sa, s c), (ta, t c)). This is because the simulator
chooses a distinct C-part for each new rooted node (unless it is saturated).
Finally , since A is a group, each r-bit block of the path is uniquely determined
by the transitions on the A-part of the nodes. ⊓ ⊔
F or a given set of queries Q and their responses X(Q), we deﬁne the sponge
consistency as the property that the responses to Q0 are equal to those that
one would obtain by applying the sponge construction from th e responses to Q1
(when the queries Q1 suﬃce to perform this calculation), i.e., that X(Q0) =
S′[X(Q1)](Q0). By construction, the queries, and their responses, made t o the
system ( S′[F], F) are sponge-consistent. F or the sponge-consistency of the queries,
and their responses, made to ( RO, P[RO]), we refer to the following lemma.
Lemma 2. Given queries to the simulator P[RO] described in Algorithm 2 and
to RO, it returns sponge-consistent responses, unless the simul ator is saturated.
Proof. The adversary can check by querying the random oracle for spo nge-
consistency for every node s in the simulator graph to which it knows the path
p. The all-zero path does not correspond to a block that can be o utput by the
sponge construction, so without loss of generality we assum e that p ̸= 0 rj .
Given the path p to the node s, its A-part must be equal to zj with z =
RO(x), where pad( x) = p′ and p′ is a valid sponge input given by p = p′0rj . As
Lemma 1 says, there is only a single path to any rooted node in t he simulator
graph, and thus the simulator guarantees this equality for t he response t to every
query to F1(s) with s a rooted node, as long as it is not saturated.
11
W e also need to show that no path is assigned to a node unless it s A-part is
chosen by the lines 6–9 of Algorithm 2. Indeed, the supernode tc (at line 11) is
the only supernode that becomes rooted due to the query . This is because the
simulator excludes supernodes with outgoing edges in the se lection of tc (as long
as the simulator is not saturated).
It follows that the simulator guarantees sponge-consisten cy for all queries Q
up to saturation. ⊓ ⊔
Lemma 3. Any sequence of queries Q0 up to cost 2c can be converted to a
sequence of queries Q1 where Q1 gives at least the same amount of information
to the adversary and has no higher cost than Q0.
Proof. A query in Q0 consists of an input x and a length n. Let p = pad( x)0r⌈n
r ⌉
and we can now convert this query into |p|queries to F1. Let s0 = (0 r , 0c) and
si+1 = F1(si, a ⊕ pi, s i, a) for 0 ≤ i < |p|be the responses to the new queries. As
Lemma 2 says that all queries up to cost 2 c are sponge-consistent, the output
to the original ( x, n ) query consists of the concatenation of the A-parts of s|p|
to s|p|+⌈n
r ⌉− 1 truncated to n bits. By the deﬁnition of the cost of queries, the
original query in Q0 has cost |p|and it results in |p|queries in Q1, each one with
cost 1.
This process can be repeated for all queries in Q0 resulting in a sequence
of queries Q1 with the same cost. If there are queries in Q0 with inputs having
common preﬁxes, these can give rise to the same queries in Q1 resulting in a
reduction in cost. ⊓ ⊔
Lemma 4. The advantage of an adversary in distinguishing between F and
P[RO] with the responses to a sequence of N < 2c queries Q1 is upper bounded
by:
fT(N ) = 1 −
N∏
i=1
(
1 − i
2c
)
.
Proof. The advantage is deﬁned as
Adv(A) = |Pr[A[F] = 1] − Pr[A[P[RO]] = 1] |
The response sequence x to a sequence of N diﬀerent queries is a sequence of N
values in A × C. W e can provide an upper bound of the advantage by computing
the probability distributions of the outcomes of the querie s to F on the one hand
and to P[RO] on the other. The optimal adversary gives back 1 for the resp onse
sequence x if Pr( x|F) > Pr(x|P[RO]) and 0 otherwise, yielding the following
upper bound:
Adv(A) ≤ 1
2
∑
x
|Pr(x|F) − Pr(x|P[RO])|, (2)
where the righthand side of this equation is known as the vari ational distance.
Since F is a transformation over A × C chosen randomly and uniformly , the
responses to the diﬀerent queries are independent and unifo rmally distributed
over A × C. It follows that all (2 r 2c)N possible outcomes are all equiprobable.
12
By inspecting Algorithm 2, the simulator always returns uni form values for
the A-part of the image. F or the C-part, the simulator chooses it non-uniformly
only if the pre-image s is rooted. T o obtain the greatest possible variational dis-
tance, the optimum strategy consists in creating N rooted nodes. As a response
to the ﬁrst query , it may return all values but 0 r . At each subsequent query , one
value of C is added to R, and thus for each query , the simulator returns a C-part
value diﬀerent from 0 r and all previous ones. Note that by restricting N < 2c
the simulator will not be saturated. Using this strategy giv es us an upper bound
on the variational distance. So for the simulator, there are (2r )N (2c − 1)(N )
(where a(n) denotes a!/ (a − n)!) possible responses with diﬀerent C-parts, each
with equal probability ((2 r )N (2c − 1)(N ))− 1, and the (2 r )N ((2c)N − (2c − 1)(N ))
others have probability 0. This gives:
Adv(A) ≤ 1 − (2c − 1)(N )
(2c)N = 1 −
N∏
i=1
(
1 − i
2c
)
. (3)
⊓ ⊔
W e have now all ingredients to prove the following theorem.
Theorem 1. A padded sponge construction calling a random transformati on,
S′[F], is (tD , t S , N, ϵ )-indistinguishable from a random oracle, for any tD , tS =
O(N 2), N < 2c and any ϵ with ϵ > f T(N ).
Proof. As discussed in Lemma 3 we can construct from a set of query seq uences
Q0, Q 1 an equivalent sequence of queries Q1′◦Q1 with no higher cost and giving
at least the same information. So, without loss of generalit y , we only need to
consider adversaries using queries Q
1
= Q1′◦Q1 and their response X(Q
1
) and
no queries Q0.
F or any ﬁxed query Q
1
, we look at the problem of distinguishing the random
variable F(Q
1
) from the random variable P[RO](Q
1
). F or a sequence of queries
Q
1
with cost N , Lemma 4 upper bounds the advantage of such an adversary to
fT(N ).
W e have tS = O(N 2) as for each query to the simulator with s rooted, it
must ﬁnd the path to s and send a query to the random oracle of cost equal to
the length of the path to s. The length of the path to s it upper bounded by N ,
the total number of rooted supernodes in the simulator graph . ⊓ ⊔
If N is signiﬁcantly smaller than 2 c, we can use the approximation 1 −x ≈ e− x
for x ≪ 1 to simplify the expression for fT(N ):
fT(N ) ≈ 1 − e− N (N +1)
2c+1 < N (N + 1)
2c+1 . (4)
4.3 When being used with a random permutation
The simulator for the case that F is a random permutation is given in Algo-
rithm 3. W e now can prove indiﬀerentiability using a series o f similar lemmas.
13
Algorithm 3 The permutation simulator P[RO]
Interface F1, taking node s as input
if node s has no outgoing edge then
if node s is rooted AND R ∪ O ̸= C (no saturation) then
Construct path to t: ﬁnd path to s, append sa and call the result p
Write p as p = p′0rj where p′ does not end with 0 r
if p′ can be unpadded into x then
Assign to ta the value zj with z = RO(x)
else
Choose ta randomly and uniformly
end if
Choose tc randomly and uniformly from C \ (R ∪ O) and such that ( ta, t c) has
no incoming edge yet
Let t = ( ta, t c)
else
Choose t randomly and uniformly from all nodes that have no incoming e dge
yet
end if
Add an edge from s to t
end if
return the node t at the end of the outgoing edge from s
Interface F− 1, taking node s as input
if node s has no incoming edge then
Choose ta randomly and uniformly
Choose tc randomly and uniformly from C \ R and such that ( ta, t c) has no outgoing
edge yet
Let t = ( ta, t c)
Add an edge from t to s
end if
return the node t at the beginning of the incoming edge into s
14
The proofs of Lemma 1 and Lemma 2 are valid for the permutation simulator
with respect to all calls to F1 but do naturally not consider calls to F− 1. The
proofs can simply be extended to the permutation simulator c ase by noting that
the F− 1 interface of the simulator excludes rooted nodes in the sele ction of the
response, implying that a call to F− 1 cannot lead to new rooted nodes and
hence also not to new paths. The proof of Lemma 3 is valid for th e permutation
simulator as it is. Finally , the output produced by the inter faces F1 and F− 1
are consistent, i.e., if F1(s) = t then F− 1(t) = s and vice-versa.
Instead of Lemma 4 we now have the following lemma.
Lemma 5. The advantage of an adversary in distinguishing F and P[RO] with
the responses to a sequence of N < 2c queries Q1 is upper bounded by:
fP(N ) = 1 −
N − 1∏
i=0
(
1 − i+1
2c
1 − i
2r 2c
)
.
Proof. The proof is similar to that of Lemma 4. Since F is a permutation over
A × C chosen randomly and uniformly , the only limitation is that f or the i-th
query , the image (or preimage) shall not be equal to any of the found images (or
preimage), resulting in (2 r 2c) − i possibilities. This leads to (2 r 2c)(N ) possible
outcomes each with probability ((2 r 2c)(N ))− 1 and (2 r 2c)N − (2r 2c)(N ) outcomes
with probability 0.
F rom inspecting Algorithm 3 if follows that the adversary ob tains the greatest
possible variational distance when he creates N rooted nodes. This leads to the
same distribution as for the transformation simulator. The possible outcomes
of the permutation simulator are a subset of the possible out comes for F. This
gives:
Adv(A) ≤ 1 − (2r )N (2c − 1)(N )
(2r 2c)(N )
= 1 −
N − 1∏
i=0
(
1 − i+1
2c
1 − i
2r 2c
)
. (5)
⊓ ⊔
These lemmas and proofs result in the following theorem, whe re the proof is
similar to that of Theorem 1.
Theorem 2. A padded sponge construction calling a random permutation, S′[F],
is (tD , t S , N, ϵ )-indistinguishable from a random oracle, for any tD , tS = O(N 2),
N < 2c and and for any ϵ with ϵ > f P(N ).
If N is signiﬁcantly smaller than 2 c, fP (N ) can be approximated closely by:
fP (N ) ≈ 1 − e− (1− 2− r )N 2+(1+2− r )N
2c+1 < (1 − 2− r )N 2 + (1 + 2 − r )N
2c+1 . (6)
Note that using a random permutation results in a better boun d than using a
random transformation. By assigning distinct C-part values of rooted nodes, the
simulators tend to generate an output distribution which is closer to that of a
permutation than to that of a transformation.
15
5 Discussion and conclusions
W e have proven that the sponge construction calling a random transformation
or permutation is indiﬀerentiable from a random oracle and o btained concrete
bounds. Here, the security parameter is the capacity c and not the output length
of the hash function. Note that other constructions also con sider the size of the
internal state as a security parameter, e.g., [13].
One may ask the question: what does this say about resistance to classical
attacks such as collision-resistance, including multicol lisions [9], (2nd) preimage
resistance, including long-message attacks [10] and herdi ng [11]? In general, it
is expected that a hash function oﬀers the same resistance as would a random
oracle, truncated to the hash function’s output length n. The success probability
after q queries is about q2/ 2n+1 for generating collisions and q/ 2n for generating
a (2nd) preimage. The sponge construction does not have a ﬁxe d output length.
However, when a hash function with the sponge construction i s used in an ac-
tual cryptographic scheme, its output will be truncated. Ou r indiﬀerentiability
bounds in terms of the capacity c permit to express up to which output length
n such a hash function may oﬀer the expected resistance. F or ex ample, it oﬀers
collision resistance (as a truncated random oracle would) f or any output length
smaller than the capacity and (2nd) preimage resistance for any output length
smaller than half the capacity . In other words, when for inst ance c = 512, a ran-
dom sponge oﬀers the same resistance as a random oracle but wi th a maximum
of 2 256 in complexity .
A function with the sponge construction can be used to build a MAC function
(by just pre-pending the key to the input) or, thanks to its lo ng output, to build
a synchronous stream cipher (by taking as input the concaten ation of a key and
an IV). Alternatively , the sponge construction can be used a s a reference for
expressing security claims when building new such designs.
Note that the bounds we have provided only hold when the spong e construc-
tion makes use of a random transformation or random permutat ion. When a
concrete transformation or permutation is taken, no such bo unds can be given.
See for example [5] and also [14] for discussions on this subj ect. However, our
bounds do say that using the sponge construction excludes ge neric attacks with
a success probability higher than the maximum of our bound N (N +1)
2c+1 and the
success probability the attack would have for a random oracl e. By generic at-
tacks we mean here attacks such as those described in [9–11], that do not exploit
speciﬁc properties of the transformation or permutation us ed but only properties
of the construction.
References
1. E. Andreeva, G. Neven, B. Preneel, and T. Shrimpton, Seven-property-preserving
hashing: ROX , Advances in Cryptology – Asiacrypt 2007 (K. Kurosawa, ed.) ,
LNCS, no. 4833, Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 130–146.
16
2. M. Bellare and T. Ristenpart, Multi-property-preserving hash domain extension
and the EMD transform , Advances in Cryptology – Asiacrypt 2006 (X. Lai and
K. Chen, eds.), LNCS, no. 4284, Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 2 99–314.
3. M. Bellare and P . Rogaway, Random oracles are practical: A paradigm for designing
eﬃcient protocols , ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security
1993 (ACM, ed.), 1993, pp. 62–73.
4. G. Bertoni, J. Daemen, M. Peeters, and G. Van Assche, Sponge functions , Ecrypt
Hash Workshop 2007, May 2007, also available as public comme nt to NIST from
http://www.csrc.nist.gov/pki/HashWorkshop/Public Comments/2007 May.html.
5. R. Canetti, O. Goldreich, and S. Halevi, The random oracle methodology, revisited ,
Proceedings of the 30th Annual ACM Symposium on the Theory of Computing,
ACM Press, 1998, pp. 209–218.
6. D. Chang, S. Lee, M. Nandi, and M. Yung, Indiﬀerentiable security analysis of
popular hash function with preﬁx-free padding , Advances in Cryptology – Asiacrypt
2006 (X. Lai and K. Chen, eds.), LNCS, no. 4284, Springer-Ver lag, 2006, pp. 283–
298.
7. J. Coron, Y. Dodis, C. Malinaud, and P . Puniya, Merkle-Damg ˚ ard revisited: How
to construct a hash function , Advances in Cryptology – Crypto 2005 (V. Shoup,
ed.), LNCS, no. 3621, Springer-Verlag, 2005, pp. 430–448.
8. I. Damg ˚ ard, A design principle for hash functions, , Advances in Cryptology –
Crypto ’89 (G. Brassard, ed.), LNCS, no. 435, Springer-Verl ag, 1989, pp. 416–427.
9. A. Joux, Multicollisions in iterated hash functions. Application t o cascaded con-
structions, Advances in Cryptology – Crypto 2004 (M. F ranklin, ed.), LN CS, no.
3152, Springer-Verlag, 2004, pp. 306–316.
10. J. Kelsey and B. Schneier, Second preimages on n-bit hash functions for much less
than 2n work, Advances in Cryptology – Eurocrypt 2005 (R. Cramer, ed.), L NCS,
no. 3494, Springer-Verlag, 2005, pp. 474–490.
11. T. Kohno and J. Kelsey, Herding hash functions and the Nostradamus attack ,
Advances in Cryptology – Eurocrypt 2006 (S. Vaudenay, ed.), LNCS, no. 4004,
Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 222–232.
12. H. Kuwakado and M. Morii, Indiﬀerentiability of single-block-length and rate-
1 compression functions , Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2006/485, 2006,
http://eprint.iacr.org/.
13. S. Lucks, A failure-friendly design principle for hash functions , Advances in Cryp-
tology – Asiacrypt 2005 (B. Roy, ed.), LNCS, no. 3788, Spring er-Verlag, 2005,
pp. 474–494.
14. U. Maurer, R. Renner, and C. Holenstein, Inidiﬀerentiability, impossibility results
on reductions, and applications to the random oracle method ology, Theory of Cryp-
tography - TCC 2004 (Moni Naor, ed.), Lecture Notes in Comput er Science, no.
2951, Springer-Verlag, 2004, pp. 21–39.
15. A. J. Menezes, P . C. van Oorschot, and S. A. Vanstone, Handbook of applied cryp-
tography, CRC Press, 1997.
16. R. Merkle, One way hash functions and DES , Advances in Cryptology – Crypto
’89 (G. Brassard, ed.), LNCS, no. 435, Springer-Verlag, 198 9, pp. 428–446.
17
