TA L x 8 6: A Realistic Typ ed Assembly Language
dagger
Greg Morrisett Karl CraryNeal Glew Dan Grossman Richard Samuels
Frederick Smith David Walker Stephanie Weirich Steve Zdancewic
Cornell University
Abstract
The goal of typed assembly language (TAL) is to pro-
vide a low-level, statically typed target language that
is better suited than Java bytecodes for supporting
a wide variety of source languages and a number of
important optimizations. In previous work, we for-
malized idealized versions of TAL and proved impor-
tant safety properties about them. In this paper, we
present our progress in defining and implementing a
realistic typed assembly language calledTA L x 8 6.The
TA L x 8 6instructions comprise a relatively complete
fragment of the Intel IA32 (32-bit 80x86 flat model)
assembly language and are thus executable on pro-
cessors such as the Intel Pentium. The type system
for the language incorporates a number of advanced
features necessary for safely compiling large programs
to good code.
To motivate the design of the type system, we
demonstrate how various high-level language features2. It is difficult (or, at the least, inefficient) to
are compiled toTA L x 8 6. For this purpose, we presentcompile high-level languages other than Java to
a type-safe C-like language called Popcorn.
1 Intro duction
The ability to type-check low-level or object code,
such as Java Virtual Machine Language (JVML)
ify the preservation of an important class of safety
properties when untrusted code is added to the sys-
tem. For example, a web browser can check memory
safety to ensure that applets do not corrupt arbitrary
data. Indeed, the entire JDK 1.2 security model de-
pends crucially on the ability of the JVML type sys-
tem to prevent untrusted code from by-passing run-
time checks that are needed to enforce the high-level
*
This material is based on work supported in part by the
AFOSR grant F49620-97-1-0013, ARPA/RADC grant F30602-
1-0317, NSF grant CCR-9708915, and National Science Foun-more, the need for rapid compilation limits the
dation Graduate Fellowships. Any opinions, findings, and con-
clusions or recommendations expressed in this publication are
those of the authors and do not reflect the views of these agen-
cies.
dagger
Carnegie Mellon University
1
*
security policy.
To support portability and type-checking, the
JVML was defined at a relatively high level of ab-
straction as a stack-based abstract machine. The
language was engineered to make type-checking rela-
tively easy. However, the JVML design suffers from
a number of drawbacks:
1. Semantic errors have been uncovered in the
JVML verifier and its English specification.
on constructing anex post factoformal model
of the language so that a type-soundness theo-
rem can be proven. A by-product of this work
is that we now know the design could have been
considerably improved had a formal model been
constructed in conjunction with the design pro-
cess.
JVML. For instance, approaches for compiling
languages with parametric polymorphism have
other example, definitions of languages such as
in a space-efficient manner. However, the lim-
itations of JVML necessitate that control-flow
stacks for such languages be explicitly encoded
as heap-allocated ob jects.
3. Although the JVML was designed for ease of
interpretation, in practice, just-in-time (JIT)
compilers are used to achieve acceptable perfor-
mance. Since the JIT translation to native code
happensafterverification, an error in the com-
piler can introduce a security hole. Further-
quality of code that a JIT compiler produces.
To address these concerns, we have been studying
the design and implementation of type systems for
machine languages. The goal of our work is to iden-
tify typing abstractions that have general utility for
encoding a variety of high-level language constructs
and security policies, but that do not interfere with
optimization. Such abstractions are necessary even
in very expressive contexts such as proof-carrying-
ically typed, RISC-based assembly language called
TAL, showed that a simple functional language could
be compiled to TAL, and proved that the type sys-
tem for TAL was sound: well-typed assembly pro-
grams could not violate the primitive typing abstrac-
tions. In later work, we described various extensions
to support stack-allocation of activation records (and
were extremely simple so as to keep the formalism
manageable.
In this paper, we informally describeTA L x 8 6,
a statically typed variant of the Intel IA32 (32-bit
80x86 flat model) assembly language. TheTA L x 8 6
type system is considerably more advanced than the
type systems we have described previously. In addi-
tion to providing support for stack-allocation, sepa-
rate type-checking and linking, and a number of ba-
sic type constructors (e.g., records, tagged unions,
arrays,etc.), the type system supports higher-order
and recursive type constructors, arbitrary data repre-
sentation, and a rich kind structure that allows poly-
morphism for different "kinds" of types.
To demonstrate the utility of these features, we also
describe a high-level language called Popcorn and a
compiler that maps Popcorn toTA L x 8 6.Popcornisa
safe C-based language that provides support for first-
class polymorphism, abstract types, tagged unions,
exceptions, and a simple module system. Ultimately,
Popcorn will support other C-like features such as
stack-allocated data and "flattened" data structures.
We begin by giving a brief overview of the process
of compiling a Popcorn program toTA L x 8 6,verify-
ing the output of the compiler, and creating an exe-
cutable. We then discuss the salient details of Pop-
corn. Finally, we present theTA L x 8 6type system
by showing how Popcorn programs can be translated
to type-correctTA L x 8 6code. We close by discussing
planned extensions.
The current software release forTA L x 8 6and Pop-
corn is available athttp://www.cs.cornell.edu/
talc.
2
2TALx86To o l s
This section describes how theTA L x 8 6tools (listed
in Table 1) are used together to develop safe native
programs. As a running example, we assume the Pop-
corn source for an application is in two files,foo.pop
andmain.pop.
First Popcorn compiles each file separately. If
there are no syntax or type errors, then six new files
are generated:foo.tal,fooi.tali,fooe.tali,
main.tal,maini.tali,andmaine.tali.The
.talfiles contain IA32 assembly language with type
annotations, as described in Section 4. A.talfile
also records what values it imports and exports by
listing typedinterfacefiles. Anyexterndeclara-
tions are compiled into the corresponding import in-
terface file (i.tali). Non-static types and values
are compiled into the corresponding export interface
file (e.tali).
Next we can run theTA L x 8 6type-checker (called
talc)onfoo.talandmain.talseparately. This
step verifies that theTA L x 8 6code is type-safe, given
the context implied by the corresponding import file.
If the Popcorn compiler is implemented correctly,
type-checking the individual.talfiles that it pro-
duces will never fail. By runningtalc, however, we
are no longer assuming that the Popcorn compiler
produces safe code.
The link-verifier checks that multiple.talfiles
make consistent assumptions about the values and
types they share. Popcorn code may fail to link-
check, just as traditional ob ject files may fail to
link, due to missing or multiple definitions. Un-
like a traditional linker, the link-verifier also checks
that files agree on thetypesof all shared values.
Link-verification guarantees that several.talfiles
are type-safe after being linked together. See Glew
The.talfiles can be assembled and linked with
traditional tools. They are compatible with MASM
(Microsoft's Macro Assembler) except that MASM
fails on long lines. We have developed an assembler
without this deficiency.
Finally, to produce a stand-alone executable some
additional trusted files are linked. One component is
the Boehm-Demers-Weiser conservative garbage col-
ment. There is also a small runtime environment that
provides essential features such as I/O. Although the
runtime cannot be written inTA L x 8 6,thetypesofits
values can, so the runtime is revealed to applications
via a typed interface file.
We have described the build cycle for an executable
in detail. In practice, the tools compose these steps
TA L x 8 6tools
talcType-checks aTA L x 8 6file.
link-verifierVerifies that linking a set ofTA L x 8 6files together is safe.
assemblerAssembles aTA L x 8 6file to produce a COFF or ELF object file.
popcornCompiles Popcorn toTA L x 8 6.
schemeCompiles a small subset of Scheme toTA L x 8 6. Written in Popcorn.
Table 1: Components of theTA L x 8 6implementation
by default, providing the programmer a build inter-
face similar to those in traditional, unsafe systems.while (true)
Although Popcorn is the only "serious" compiler
targetingTA L x 8 6at this time,TA L x 8 6is not specifi-
cally designed for Popcorn. In fact, we have written
a compiler for a small part of Scheme, thus demon-
strating the feasibility of compiling a higher-order,
dynamically typed language.
3Popcorn
In this section, we briefly summarize the features of
Popcorn. This discussion provides a starting point
for the following section on compiling toTA L x 8 6.
safe features, such as pointer arithmetic, the address
operator, and pointer casts, are missing. Compiling
these features safely would impose a significant per-
formance penalty on all Popcorn code. Popcorn does
have several advanced features not in C such as ex-
ceptions and parametric polymorphism. It does not
have objects for reasons discussed in the Future Work
section. In addition, we avoid various Java-style se-
mantic decisions for efficiency reasons. For exam-
ple, compiling Java correctly requires run-time type
checks on array updates, and its precise exception
semantics prevents some standard optimizations.
3.1 Control Flow
The basic control constructs of Popcorn, such asif,
while,for,do,break,andcontinue, are identical
to those in C except that test expressions must have
1
typebool.
Popcorn'sswitchconstruct differs from C in that
execution never "falls through" cases. Furthermore,
a default case is required unless the other cases are
exhaustive. The argument of a switch test expression
can be anint,char,union,orexception. For exam-
ple, we could find the first occurrence of the character
'a'in an array:
1
The result type of relational and logical operators isbool.
3
int i = 0, answer;
{
case 'a': answer = i;
break; // break from while
default: i++;
}
Array subscripts are bounds-checked at run time (see
Section 4.4); the above example will exit immediately
ifarrdoes not contain an'a'.
Exceptions may have different types and exception
handlers may switch on the name of an exception, as
in Java. However, exception names are not hierarchi-
cal.
3.2 Data
Currently, the simple types of Popcorn arebool,
char,short,int,string,andunsignedvariants of
the numeric types. We intend to add floating point
numbers and long integers soon. Unlike C, strings
are not null-terminated. Arrays carry their size to
support bounds-checks. A specialsizeconstruct re-
trieves the size of an array or string.
Popcorn also has tuples which are useful for encod-
ing anonymous structures and multiple return values.
Thenewconstruct creates a new tuple (as well as new
structandunionvalues). For example, the follow-
ing code performs component-wise doubling of a pair
of ints:
*(int,int) x = new (3, 4);
*(int,int) dbl = new (x.1+x.1, x.2+x.2);
Popcorn has two kinds of structure definitions:
structand?struct. They resemblestruct *in
C. The difference betweenstructand?structis
that values of types defined withstructcannot be
null, which is a primitive construct in the language.
Values of types defined with?structare checked for
null on field access; failure causes the program to exit
immediately.
Unions in Popcorn are more like ML datatypes
than C unions. Each variant consists of a tag and
an associated type (possibly void). For example,
union tree
{void Leaf; int Numleaf; *(tree,tree)Node};
Any value of auniontype is in a particular variant,
as determined by its tag, and may not be treated
otherwise. We useswitchto determine the variant
of an expression and bind the corresponding value to
a variable. Continuing our example, we can write:
int sum(tree e){
switch e{
case Leaf: return 0;
case Numleaf(x): return x;
case Node(x): return sum(x.1)+sum(x.2);
}
}
3.3 Parametric Polymorphism
Popcorn function,struct,?struct,anduniondec-
larations may all be parameterized over types. For
example, we can define lists as:
?struct !'a?list{'a hd; !'a?list tl;}
To declare that a variablexholds a list of ints, we
instantiate the type parameter:!int?list x.Ex-
plicit type instantiation on expressions is not nec-
essary; for example,new list(3,null)has type
!int?list. Having polymorphic functions means we
can write a length function that works on any type of
list. Polymorphism is particularly useful with func-
tion pointers. For example, we can write a map func-
tion:
!'b?list map('b f('a), !'a?list l){
if (l == null) return null;
return new list(f(l.hd), map(f, l.tl));
}
A call to this function could look like:
!int?list x;
...
!string?list y = map(int_to_string, x);
4 An Overview ofTALx86
In this section, we give an overview of the featuresIn the rest of this section, we assume that the syn-
found inTA L x 8 6and describe via example how those
features may be used. In particular, we show how
Popcorn code may be compiled to well-typedTA L x 8 6.
TA L x 8 6uses the syntax of MASM for instructions
and data, and augments it with syntax for type an-
notations necessary for verification. The type anno-discussion of manyTA L x 8 6features, including excep-
tations can be broken into the following classes:
4
1. Import and export interface information - used
for separately type-checking ob ject files.
2. Type constructor declarations - used to declare
new types and type abbreviations.
3. Typing preconditions on code labels - used to
specify the types that registers must have before
control may enter the associated code.
4. Types on data labels - used to specify the type
of a static data item.
5. Typing coercions on instruction operands - used
to coerce values of one type to another.
6. Macro instructions - used to encapsulate small
instruction sequences so that the type-checker
treats the sequence as an atomic action.
The most important of these are the typing precon-
ditions on code labels (3). These annotations are of
the general form:
foralla:k...a:k.{r:t,...,r:t}
11mm11nn
and are used by the type-checker to ensure that, if
control is ever transferred to the corresponding label,
then registersrthroughrwill contain values of
1n
typestthroughtrespectively. The bound type
1n
vari abl es,a,...,a, allow the types on the regis-
1m
ters to be polymorphic. One must explicitly instanti-
ate a polymorphic precondition before control can be
transferred to the corresponding label. As we will see,
TA L x 8 6supports different "kinds" of types. Conse-
quently, each type-variable is explicitly labeled with
akindkso that we may check that only appropriate
types are used to instantiate the bound type vari-
ables.
Given a typing precondition for a code label, the
type-checker verifies that the instructions in the asso-
ciated code block are type-correct under the assump-
tions thata,...,aareabstracttypes, and thatr
1mi
has typet. By treating the type variables as ab-
i
stract types, we ensure that the code will be type-
correct for any appropriate instantiation.
tax and semantics of MASM instructions and data
will be apparent, and focus our attention on the typ-
ing annotations and abstractions. We show how var-
ious high-level features from Popcorn may be com-
piled toTA L x 8 6. Due to space limitations, we omit
tions, static data, higher-order types, and interfaces.
4.1 Basics
Our first example uses a loop to calculate the sum of
the firstnnatural numbers:
int i = n+1;
int s = 0;
while(--i ? 0)
s+=i;
We could translate the above fragment to the fol-
lowingTA L x 8 6code, assumingnis initially in register
ecx:
mov eax,ecx ; i = n
inc eax ; ++i
mov ebx,0 ; s = 0
jmp test
body:{eax: B4, ebx: B4}
add ebx,eax ; s += i
test:{eax: B4, ebx: B4}
dec eax ; --i;
cmp eax,0 ; i ? 0
jg body
In this example, the label preconditions say the
same thing: "control transfer to this code cannot oc-
cur unless registerseaxandebxhaveB4val ues (4-
byte integers) in them." The type-checker uses these
constraints to check that the operands to each in-
struction in each block are safe.
Assume for our example that we knowecxinitially
contains aB4. Then after the first instruction,eax
also has aB4. The increment is therefore legal; it is
not legal to increment pointers. The third instruction
puts aB4inebx. Hence the verifier is assured that the
precondition for jumping to the test label is satisfied.
The test label requires aB4inebxeven though it
does not use the value because it transfers control to
bodywhich does use it.
Now consider writing a function:
int sum(int n){
// previous example is the body
return s;
}
Of course, the function must have some way to
return to the caller. Assume for the moment that
the caller places the return address in registerebp.
In the code below, the typing precondition assumes
thatecxcontains a 4-byte integer andebpcontains
a code label with its own precondition. In particular,
the type annotationebp:{eax: B4}should be read,
"ebpcontains a pointer to code that expects aB4in
eax."
5
sum:{ecx: B4, ebp:{eax: B4}}
!as above?
body:{eax: B4, ebx: B4, ebp:{eax: B4}}
!as above?
test:{eax: B4, ebx: B4, ebp:{eax: B4}}
dec eax ; --i;
cmp eax,0 ; i ? 0
jg body ; if so, goto body
mov eax,ebx ; otherwise,
jmp ebp ; return s
The finaljmpverifies becauseeaxcontains aB4.
(Notice it would verify even without the preceding
movinstruction; type soundness does not guarantee
algorithmic correctness.) The type on thesumlabel
describes a non-standard calling convention with the
argument inecx, the return address inebp,andthe
result ineax. Such calling conventions are typically
used for leaf procedures in an optimizing compiler.
One way to "call"sumis to usejmp.
mov ebp,after
mov ecx,10
jmp sum
after:{eax: B4}
!code that uses result?
The code explicitly moves the return address
(after)intoebp, moves the integer argument into
ecx,andthenjumpstosum. The jump type-checks
because the precondition onsumrequires an integer
inecxand a return address inebpthat expects an
integer ineax.
4.2 Stacks and Function Calls
To support richer and more realistic calling conven-
tions,TA L x 8 6has a control-flow stack abstraction
and stack types. The following examples demonstrate
how these types are used. For a theoretical discus-
The standard C calling convention on Win32 re-
quires that the return address be placed on top of
2
the stack,followed by the arguments. Before return-
ing, a function pops the return address. The caller is
3
responsible for popping the arguments.
TA L x 8 6describes the shape of the stack as a list of
types, whereserepresents an empty stack and ifs
is a stack type, thent::sis the type that describes
stacks where the top-most element has typetand
the rest of the stack is described bys. For example,
2
Stacks "grow" towards lower addresses; the "top" is the
lowest address.
3
Also,ebpis callee-save; we will incorporate this shortly.
{eax: B4}::B4::B4::se
is the type of a stack with three elements: a return
address expecting aB4ineaxand then twoB4val ues.
If a register points to a stack (asespgenerally does),
we writeesp: sptrswheresis a stack type.
If we give oursumfunction the type{esp: sptr
{eax: B4}::B4::se}, then we can only callsum
when the stack contains exactly the return address
and the argument. Clearly we would like calls tosum
to type-check regardless of the depth of the stack. To
overcome this problem,TA L x 8 6supportsstack poly-
morphismto abstract portions of the stack. For ex-
ample, we could assignsumthe type:
forallr:Ts.
{esp: sptr{eax: B4, esp: sptr B4::r}::B4::r}
which says, "for any stack shaper,sumcan be called
wheneverespcontainsapointertoastackwitha
suitable return address, followed by an integer, fol-
lowedbyastackwithshaper." The code associated
withsumis verified treatingras an abstract type.
Notice that ifsumreturns by jumping to the given
return address, the stack must have the same shape
as on input except without the return address. In-
deed, a much stronger property holds sincesumis
type-checked holdingrabstract: The input stack cor-
responding torwill remain unmodified throughout
assured thatsumwill not read or modify the caller's
local data (or that of its caller,etc.).
Returning to our example,mov eax,ecxat the be-
ginning ofsumwould now become,
so as to load the integer argument from the stack
intoeax. The finaljmpwould be replaced withretn,
which pops the return address and then jumps to it.
Acalltosummust now have an additional annotation
that instantiatesrwith the actual stack type (not in-
cluding the input argument, which is not part ofr).
A simple example is:
main:{esp: se}
push 42 ; hidden on stack
push 10 ; input argument
call tapp(sum, !B4::se?)
after:
!code after?
Thecallinstruction pushes the return address
(after) before jumping, and thetappinstantiates
rwithB4::se.
Usually a call will occur in a context where part of
the stack is already abstract, so the instantiation of
rwill use a stack variable in scope at the call site.add ecx, ecx ; x.1+x.1 in ecx
Indeed,rcan be instantiated with a stack type con-
tainingr! In this respect,TA L x 8 6supports a form of
6
polymorphic recursion. For example, Figure 1 shows
a recursive implementation ofsum. The recursive call
says that the stack now has one moreB4and return
address on it.
We can also use polymorphism to encode callee-
save registers into the calling convention. To force
sumto preserve the value inebp,werequirethatebp
has a value of distinct abstract typeaon entry and
exit. We would write:
foralla:T4r:Ts.
{ebp:a, esp: sptr{ebp:a, ...}, ...}
whereT4means thatacan be any 4-byte type. A call
would now have to instantiateaandrappropriately.
TA L x 8 6supports addition of constants to stack
pointers, and values may be written into arbitrary
non-abstract stack slots. Thus, it is not necessary to
replace a value on the stack via a sequence of pushes
and pops; the element can be directly overwritten.
Additional constructs in the stack-typing discipline
ofTA L x 8 6support other compiler tasks. For in-
stance, to compile Popcorn exceptions, the code gen-
erator needs to pop off a dynamic amount of data
from the control stack. To support this,TA L x 8 6pro-
vides a limited form of pointers into the middle of
the stack. These limited pointers are also sufficient
to support displays (static links) for compiling lan-
guages such as Pascal. However, they are not suffi-
cient to support general stack-allocation of data.
4.3 Memory Allocation
To support general heap allocation of data,TA L x 8 6
provides additional constructs that we now explore,
beginning with tuples. Recall our Popcorn tuple code
from Section 3:
*(int,int) x = new (3, 4);
*(int,int) dbl = new (x.1+x.1, x.2+x.2);
At the assembly level, creating a new pair involves
two separate tasks: allocating memory and initializ-
ing the fields. ThisTA L x 8 6code corresponds to the
preceding Popcorn:
push eax ; save x
int sum(int n){sum:forallr:Ts.{esp: sptr{eax: B4, esp: sptr B4::r}::B4::r}
if (n==0)
return 0;jne tapp(iffalse, !r?)
elsemov eax,0
return n+sum(n-1);retn
}iffalse:forallr:Ts.{esp: sptr{eax: B4, esp: sptr B4::r}::B4::r}
dec ebx
push ebx
; recursive call instantiatesrusing current stack shape
call tapp(sum, !
add esp,4
retn
Figure 1: Recursive Function with C Calling Convention
add ecx,ecx ; x.2+x.2 in ecx
Themalloc"instruction" is actually a macro that
expands to code that allocates memory of the appro-
priate size. This routine puts a pointer to the newly-
allocated space intoeax. The verifier then knows
thateaxcontains a pointer touninitializedfields as
specified in the typing annotation![:B4,:B4]?.
Tracking initialization is important for safety be-
cause fields may themselves be pointers, and the type
system should prevent dereferencing an uninitialized
pointer. To do this, the type of every field has a
variance, one ofu,r,w,orrw, standing for unini-
tialized, read-only, write-only, and read-write respec-
tively. The type system does not allow uninitialized
fields to be read. However, uninitialized fields may be
written with a value of the appropriate type, and then
the field is changed to a read-write field. Sub-typing
allows a read-write field to be used as read-only or
write-only.
Here are the first three lines of our example where
the comment describes the type that the verifier as-
signs toeaxafter each instruction:
uu
,B4]
rwu
,B4]
rwrw
,B4]
For example, the second type says, "a pointer to a
tuple with two fields, an initializedB4, followed by
an uninitializedB4." Of course, these pointer types
can appear anywhereB4can, such as in part of a
stack type or label type.
7
{eax: B4, esp: sptr B4::r}::B4::r?)
TA L x 8 6places no restrictions on the order in which
fields are initialized, nor does it require that all fields
be initialized before passing the pointer to another
function. It is possible for a field to be "initialized"
more than once by creating an alias. For example:
mov ecx, eax ; ecx aliases eax
In this code, when the contents ofeaxare moved
intoecx,ecxisassignedthesametypeaseax.The
two stores thus initialize the same field twice. This
aliasing does not lead to a type unsoundness because
thetwovalueshavethesametype. Sincethetypesys-
tem does not track aliasing, some semantically mean-
ingful optimizations cannot be expressed in code that
type-checks. For instance, the verifier rejects the fol-
lowing code because it assumes that the field[ecx+0]
is uninitialized:
mov ecx, eax ; ecx aliases eax
Though it would be possible to augmentTA L x 8 6
to conservatively track aliasing, doing so would fur-
ther complicate the type system. Thus far, we have
favored this simpler approach.
Finally, thoughTA L x 8 6supports explicit alloca-
tion and deallocation of stack-allocated objects, it
does not support general purpose pointers to stack-
allocated ob jects. In contrast, general purpose point-
ers to heap-allocated ob jects are supported, but ex-able, in which case the size of the array is unknown.
plicit deallocation is not. Rather, we link theTA L x 8 6Furthermore, as with other type expressions,sis a
code against a conservative garbage collector so thatpurelystaticconstruct used only for verification --
unreachable ob jects may be reclaimed. To sup-
port explicit deallocation would require an extensiveshow, this gives us the flexibility to place the run-
4.4 Arrays
Support for arrays inTA L x 8 6is perhaps the most
complicated feature in the language. The critical is-
sue is that array sizes and array indices cannot always
be determined statically, yet to preserve type-safety,
we must ensure that any index lies between 0 and
thephysicalsizeofthearray.TA L x 8 6provides a
very flexible mechanism for tracking the size of an
array without requiring that the size be placed in a
pre-determined position.
Array subscript and update require special macro
instructions (asubandaupd) which take an array
pointer, the size of the array, an integer offset, and
foraupd, a value to place in the array. The macros
expand into code sequences that perform a bounds
check, exit immediately when the index is out of
bounds, and otherwise perform the appropriate sub-
script or update operation. Because the array bounds
checks are not separated from the subscript or up-
date operations, an optimizer cannot eliminate or re-
schedule them. Also, no pointers into the middle of
arrays are allowed by the current type system, further
limiting optimization.
To support arrays, theTA L x 8 6type system in-
cludes two new type constructors. The first,S(s),
is called asingletontype, wheresis a compile-time
expression corresponding to an integer. The primary
purpose of singleton types is to statically track the ac-
tual integer value of a register or word in memory. For
instance, ifeaxhas typeS(3), then the value ineax
must be equal to 3 (i.e., it is drawn from the single-
ton set{3}). As with other kinds of type expressions,
integer type expressions can be polymorphic. Thus,
ifecxhas typeS(a), then we cannot determine stat-
ically the (integer) value contained inecx. However,
ifebxalso has typeS(a), then the type system can
conclude that the contents of the two registers are
equal. The type system treats singleton integer types
as subtypes ofB4so that they may be used whenever
aB4is required.
The second new type constructor is of the form
v
array(s,t)wheretis the type of the array ele-
ments,vis their variance, andsis a type expressionthough this is the default representation used by our
that represents the size of the array. Notice thats
could be a constant, in which case the size of the
array is known statically, or it could be a type vari-"unboxed" when the Popcorn array does not escape.
8
it isnotavailable as a run-time value. As we shall
time array size anywhere we want instead of in some
fixed position. Furthermore, if the size of the array
can be determined statically, then the size need not
be tracked at run-time.
Thecrucialissueistoenforcethepropertythat
only a run-time integer value equal to the size of the
array is passed toasuboraupdfor the appropriate
bounds check. In particular, if the array has type
v
array(s,t), then the integer passed as the size of
the array must have typeS(s). For example, the
followingTA L x 8 6code increments index 2 of a size 5
array ofB4val ues:
rw
lab:{eax: array(5, B4), ebx: S(5)}
mov ecx, 2
; array size in ebx, element size is 4.
asub edx, eax, 4, ecx, ebx
inc edx
; array size in ebx, element size is 4.
aupd eax, 4, ecx, edx, ebx
This example may only be used on arrays of size 5. To
support arrays whose size is unknown statically, we
must introduce an integer type variable and quantify
over it to achieve "size polymorphism":
rw
lab:foralls:Sint.{eax: array(s,B4), ebx: S(s)}
(The instructions do not need to change.)
Our compiler represents all Popcorn arrays as a
pointer to a data structure containing the (run-time)
size followed by the array elements. Anexistential
type is used to tie the type of the run-time size with
the type of the array as in:
rrw
existss:Sint.^*[S(s),array(s,B4)]
The type reads as "there exists some integerssuch
that I am a pointer to a structure containing an in-
teger equal tos, followed bysB4values." Using an
existential to package the run-time size with the ar-
ray, we can pass the data structure to any function,
or place it in any data structure and yet maintain
enough information that we can always perform a
checked subscript or update on the array. Notice that
compiler, it is not required byTA L x 8 6.Inparticular,
the run-time size and the underlying array could be
?struct int_list{
int hd;
len:forallr:Ts.
int_list tl;
{esp: sptr{eax: B4, esp: sptr 'int_list::r}::'int_list::r}
}
mov eax, 0 ; i=0 in eax
int len(int_list lst){
int i = 0;
jmp tapp(test, !
while (lst != null){
body:forallr:Ts.{
++i;
inc eax ; ++i
lst = lst.tl;
}
fallthru !r?
return i;
test:forallr:Ts.{esp: ..., eax: B4, ebx:'int_list}
}
btagi ne, ebx, 0, tapp(body,!r?) ; check if ebx is null (0)
retn ; otherwise return
Figure 2: List of Integers Implementation
When the size of the array is known at compile-time,to a pair of an integer and anintlist.
an optimizer could avoid storing the size entirely.
Finally, there are two ways to create arrays in
TA L x 8 6. An n-tuple of values, all of some typet
and variancev, may be coerced to an array of type
v
array(n,t). Second, the trusted runtime provides
a function which takes an integernand a valuex
of typetand returns an array of sizenwith each
element initialized tox.
We are currently working to eliminate theasuband
aupdmacros and to expose the bounds checks so that
an optimizer could eliminate them. To do so requires
supporting a more expressive symbolic language of
static integer expressions within the type system and
the ability to prove inequalities between such expres-
4.5 Sums and Recursive Types
To demonstrateTA L x 8 6sums and recursive types, we
now consider implementing a linked list of integers
(see Figure 2). There are two critical points here:
First, a list is fundamentally asum type:avalueof
type list is either null or a pointer to a tuple, and
we must ensure that the code works in either case.
Second, the list type is recursive.
The Popcorn code has a?structdefinition for lists
and alenfunction which calculates a list's length.
TheTA L x 8 6code has a corresponding type definition
and corresponding code. TheTA L x 8 6type definitionTheTA L x 8 6type annotations take far less space than
says a value can be coerced to have typeintlistif
it is either the singleton value 0 (for null) or a pointerallows the typing preconditions to be dropped for cer-
9
rwrw
,'int_list]?
r?)
rwrw
,'int_list]}
rwrw
,'intlist]
Upon entry to thelenlabel, the integer variable
iis initialized to 0 and placed in registereax.The
list argument is placed inebxand the code jumps
to the loop test. The test coercesebxfrom the
typeintlistto its representation type, namely
the corresponding sum type. The next instruction,
btagi, is a macro instruction that tests whetherebx
is not equal (ne) to 0, and if so, branches to the
body. The macro expands into a simple compare and
branch. The type-checker verifies that the register be-
ing tested has a sum type, and using the value tested
against, refines the type of the register. In particular,
at the labelbody, we are allowed to make the stronger
assumption thatebxis in fact a pointer, and not null.
This assumption allows theoper-
ation to verify, which has the effect of settingebxto
the tail of the list.
Our current Popcorn compiler generates more
na"ive code. The list is tested for null once as part
of the while test, and then again when the tail of the
list is selected. However, it is clear that an optimizing
compiler can use dataflow analysis to determine that
the second check is redundant. What is not as clear is
whether an optimizing compiler can easily maintain
the appropriate typing annotations.
4.6 Making Types Smaller
we have suggested so far. For example, the verifier
tain labels. In particular, labels that serve only as1. A binary ob ject file format to replaceTA L x 8 6's
forward branch targets need no typing precondition.
The verifier simply re-verifies the corresponding codeboth space and parsing time. It will also pro-
block for each branch. The restriction to forward
branches ensures termination of the verifier.
The verifier also supports type abbreviations so
that the common sub-terms of types may be ab-
stracted. For example, Popcorn gives the same type
to everystring. Rather than repeat this type every-
where, Popcorn defines astrabbreviation and uses
it in place of the unabbreviated form:
rrw
type !str =existss:Sint.^*[S(s),array(s,B1)]?
Another source of repetition is the code types. For
example, our code types essentially repeat the type
of the stack twice, once for the stack and once for
the type of the return address. We can abstract the
calling convention with a function abbreviation:
type !F = fn ret:T4 s:Ts.
{esp: sptr{eax: ret, esp: sptr s}::s}?
For example, the fully expanded type of the polymor-
phic map function is the rather unwieldy:
map:foralla:T4b:T4r:Ts.
{esp: sptr
{eax:('listb),
'
esp:sptr(forallr:Ts.
'
{esp: sptr{eax:besp: sptra::r}
'
::a::r})
::('lista)::r}
'
::(forallr:Ts.
'
{esp: sptr{eax:besp: sptra::r}
'
::a::r})
::('lista)::r}
but with the above abbreviation becomes:
map:foralla:T4b:T4r:Ts.
F ('listb)
''
((forallr:Ts. Fb(a::r))::('lista)::r)
which is smaller, more readable, and in practice faster
to verify.
5 Summary and Future Work
We have described the currently available tools for
producingTA L x 8 6, including a compiler for the C-
like language Popcorn. Through examples, we have
demonstrated howTA L x 8 6ensures the safety of as-
sembly code, even in the presence of advanced struc-
tures and optimizations.
Planned extensions to our system will both add
tools and increase the expressiveness of the languages.
They include:
10
current ASCII format. This format will save
vide a better setting for evaluating verifier per-
formance.
2. Support for floating point and MMX instruc-
tions. We do not expect this to be difficult.
3. Support for run-time code generation, as devel-
oped by Trevor Jim and Like Hornoff at the
an extension to Popcorn called Cyclone makes
these features available at a higher level. We
are currently working through some minor inter-
operability issues.
4. A more advanced dependent type system to al-
low bounds-check elimination when it can be
proven that it is safe to do so.
5. Support for object abstractions inTA L x 8 6.To
support objects inTA L x 8 6requires either hav-
ing ob ject types or typing constructs to trans-
late object types into. Having object types in
TA L x 8 6would restrictTA L x 8 6to OO languages
compatible with that object model. While a
lot of research has been done on translating ob-
ject types, these translations either sacrifice the-
oretical properties or introduce run-time over-
head. We are currently investigating a new ef-
ficient object encoding that involves sub-typing,
F-bounded quantification, and self quantifiers.
6 Acknowledgments
We thank Chris Hawblitzel who wrote the first ver-
sion of Popcorn. Trevor Jim and Luke Hornoff pro-
vided invaluable feedback on the system in addition
to adding support for run-time code generation.
References
in Abadi and Raymie Stata. A type sys-
tem for Java bytecode subroutines. InTwenty-
Fifth ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Prin-
ciples of Programming Languages, pages 149-160,
San Diego, California, USA, January 1998.
The MLJ User Guide, 1998.
lection in an uncooperative environment.Software
Practice and Experience, 18(9):807-820, 1988.
tain parametricity results. Technical Report CMU-119, Paris, France, 1997.
CS-98-185, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA, December 1998.
Typed memory management in a calculus of capa-
bilities. InTwenty-Sixth ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT
Symposium on Principles of Programming Lan-
guages, pages 262-275, San Antonio, Texas, USA,
January 1999.
and modular assembly language. InTwenty-Sixth
ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles
of Programming Languages, pages 250-261, San An-
tonio, Texas, USA, January 1999.
and run-time code generation. InACM Workshop
on Partial Evaluation and Semantics-Based Program
Manipulation, pages 60-74, San Antonio, Texas,
USA, January 1999.
5
Rees. Revisedreport on the algorithmic lan-
guage Scheme.ACM SIGPLAN Notices, 33(9):26-
76, September 1998. With H. Abelson, N. I. Adams,
IV,D.H.Bartley,G.Brooks,R.K.Dybvig,D.P.
Friedman, R. Halstead, C. Hanson, C. T. Haynes, E.
Kohlbecker,D.Oxley,K.M.Pitman,G.J.Rozas,
G. L. Steele, Jr., G. J. Sussman, and M. Wand.
The C
Programming Language. Prentice-Hall, Englewood
Cliffs, NJ 07632, USA, second edition, 1988.
llin.The Java Virtual
Machine Specification. Addison-Wesley, 1996.
Walker. Stack-based typed assembly language. In
Workshop on Types in Compilation, volume 1473
ofLecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 28-52,
Kyoto, Japan, March 1998.
Glew. From System F to typed assembly language
(extended version). Technical Report TR97-1651,
Department of Computer Science, Cornell Univer-
sity, Ithaca, New York, USA, November 1997.
Glew.FromSystemFtotypedassemblylanguage. In
Twenty-Fifth ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium
on Principles of Programming Languages, pages 85-
97, San Diego, California, USA, January 1998.
Liskov. Parameterized types for Java. InTwenty-
Fourth ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on
Principles of Programming Languages, pages 132-
145, Paris, France, 1997.
Twenty-
Fourth ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on
11
Principles of Programming Languages, pages 106-
type system for Java bytecode subroutines. In
Twenty-Sixth ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium
on Principles of Programming Languages, pages 70-
78, San Antonio, Texas, USA, January 1999.
Translating theory into practice. InTwenty-Fourth
ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles
of Programming Languages, pages 146-159, Paris,
France, January 1997.
Formal Underpinnings of
Java. Vancouver, Canada, October 1998.
ray bound checking through dependent types. In
ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Lan-
guage Design and Implementation, pages 249-257,
Montreal, Canada, June 1998.
in practical programming. InTwenty-Sixth ACM
SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of
Programming Languages, pages 214-227, San Anto-
nio, Texas, USA, January 1999.
