TIL: A Type-Directed Optimizi
D. Tarditi, G. Morrisett, P. Cheng, C. Stone, R. Harper, and P. Lee
School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3891
1Introduction
We are investigating a new approach to compiling Standard
ML SML based on four key technologies:intensionalpoly-
morphism23,nearly tag-free garbage collection
conventional functional language optimization,andloop op-
timization.To explore the practicality of our approach, we
have constructed a compiler for SML called TIL, and are
thus far encouraged by the results: On DEC ALPHA work-
stations, programs compiled by TIL are roughly three times
faster, do one-fth the total heap allocation, and use one-
half the physical memory of programs compiled bySMLof
New Jersey SMLNJ. However, our results are still pre-
liminary | wehave not yet investigated howtoimprove
compile time TIL takes about eight times longer to compile
programs than SMLNJ. Also, wehave not yet implemented
the full module system of SML, although we do provide sup-
port for structures and separate compilation.Finally,we
expect the performance of programs compiled by TIL to im-
prove signicantly as we tune the compiler and implement
more optimizations.
Twokey issues in the compilation of advanced languages
such as SML are the presence ofgarbage collectionandtype
variables. Most compilers use a universal representation for
values of unknown or variable type. In particular, values are
forced to t into a tagged machine word values larger than
amachine word are represented as pointers to tagged, heap-
allocated objects. This approach supports fast garbage col-
lection and ecient polymorphic functions, but can result in
inecientcodewhentypes are known at compile time. Even
with recent advances in SML compilation, such as Leroy's
represenalues must be placed in a uni-
versal representation before being stored in updateable data
This researchwas sponsored in part by the Advanced Research
Projects Agency CSTO under the title \The Fox Project: Advanced
Languages for Systems Software", ARPA Order No. C533, issued by
ESCENS under Contract No. F19628-95-C-0050,andinpartby the
National Science Foundation under Grant No. CCR-9502674, and in
part by the Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Cam-
bridge, England.David Tarditi was also partly supported byan
AT&T Bell Labs PhD Scholarship. The views and conclusions con-
tained in this document are those of the authors and should not be in-
terpreted as representing ocial policies, either expressed or implied,
of the Advanced Research Projects Agency, the U.S. Government, the
National Science Foundation or AT&T.
To appear in the ACM SIGPLAN '96 Conference on
Programming Language Design and Implementation
ng Compiler for ML
structures e.g., arrays or recursive data structures e.g.,
lists.
Intensional polymorphismandtag-free garbage collection
eliminate the need to use a universal representation when
compiling polymorphic languages. TIL uses these technolo-
gies to representmany data values \naturally".For ex-
ample, TIL provides tag-free, unallocated, word-sized in-
tegers aligned, unboxed oating-point arrays and unallo-
cated multi-argument functions. These natural representa-
tions and calling conventions not only improve the perfor-
mance of SML programs, but also allowthemtointeroperate
with legacy code written in languages suchasCandFortran.
When types are unknown at compile time, TIL may produce
machine code which is slower and bigger than conventional
approaches. This is because types must be constructed and
passed to polymorphic functions, and polymorphic functions
must examine the types at run-time to determine appropri-
ate execution paths.However, when types are known at
compile time, no overhead is incurred to support polymor-
phism or garbage collection.
Because these technologies make polymorphic functions
slower, it becomes important to eliminate as many polymor-
phic functions at compile time as is possible. Inlining and
uncurrying are well-known techniques for eliminating poly-
morphic and higher-order functions. Wehave found that
for the benchmarks used here, these techniques eliminate all
polymorphic functions and all but a few higher-order func-
tions when programs are compiled as a whole.
Wehave also found that applying traditional loop op-
timizations to recursive functions, such as common sub-
expression elimination and invariantremoval, is important.
In fact, these optimization reduce execution time byame-
dian of 39.
An important property of TIL is that all optimizations
and the key transformations are performed ontyped inter-
mediate languageshence the name TIL. Maintaining cor-
rect type information throughout optimization is necessary
to support both intensional polymorphism and garbage col-
lection, both of which require type information at run time.
By using strongly-typed intermediate languages, weensure
that type information is maintained in a principled fash-
ion, instead of relying uponad hocinvariants. In fact, us-
ing the intermediate forms of TIL, an \untrusted" compiler
can produce fully optimized intermediate code, and a client
can automatically verify the type integrityofthecode. We
have found that this ability has a strong engineering benet:
type-checking the output of each optimization or transfor-
mation helps us identify and eliminate bugs in the compiler.
In the remainder of this paper, we describe the technolo-
gies used by TIL in detail, giveanoverview of the structure
of TIL, present a detailed example showing how TIL com-
piles ML code, and give performance results of code pro-
duced by TIL.
2Overview of the Technologies
This section contains a high-level overview of the technolo-
gies we use in TIL.
2.1Intensional Polymorphism
In
representations due to polymorphism, separate compilation,
abstract datatypes, and garbage collection. It also supports
ecient calling conventions multiple arguments passed in
registers and tag-free polymorphic, structural equality.
With intensional polymorphism, types are constructed
and passed as values at run time to polymorphic functions,
and these functions can branch based on the types.For
example, when extracting a value from an array, TIL uses a
typecaseexpression to determine the type of the array and
to select the appropriate specialized subscript operation:
x:array,i:int=
typecaseof
int= intsubx, i
|oat= floatsubx, i
|ptr = ptrsubx, i
If the type of the array can be determined at compile-time,
then an optimizer can eliminate thetypecase:
suboat,!floatsuba,5
However, intensional polymorphism comes with two costs.
First, wemust construct and pass representations of types to
polymorphic functions at run time. Furthermore, wemust
compile polymorphic functions to support any possible rep-
resentation and inserttypecaseconstructs to select the ap-
propriate code paths. Hence, the code we generate for poly-
morphic functions is both bigger and slower, and minimizing
polymorphism becomes quite important.
Second, in order to use type information at run time, for
both intensional polymorphism and tag-free garbage collec-
tion, wemust propagate types through each stage of compi-
lation. To address this second problem, almost all compila-
tion stages, including optimization and closure conversion,
are expressed as type-directed, type-preserving translations
to strongly-typed intermediate languages.
The key diculty with using typed intermediate lan-
guages is formulating a type system that is expressive enough
to statically type check terms that branchontypes at run
time, suchassub.Thetype system used in TIL is based
on the approach suggested b
Types themselves are represented as expressions in a simply-
typed-calculus extended with an inductively generated
base kind the monotypes, and a corresponding induction
elimination form.The induction elimination form is es-
sentially a \Typecase" at the type level this allows us to
write type expressions that track the run-time control ow
of term-leveltypecaseexpressions. Nevertheless, the type
system used by TIL remains bothsoundanddecidable.This
implies that at any stage during optimization, we can auto-
matically verify the type integrity of the code.
2.2Conventional and Loop-Oriented Opti-
mizations
Program optimization is crucial to reducing the cost of in-
tensional polymorphism,improving loops and recursivefunc-
tions, and eliminating higher-order and polymorphic func-
tions.TIL employs optimizations found in conventional
functional language compilers, including inlining, uncurry-
ing, dead-code elimination, and constant-folding. In addi-
tion, TIL does a set of generalized \loop-oriented" optimiza-
tions to improve recursive functions. These optimizations in-
clude common-subexpression elimination, invariantremoval,
and array-bound check removal. In spite of the large num-
ber of dierent optimizations, each optimization produces
type-correct code.
TIL applies optimizations across entire compilation units.
This makes it more likely that inlining and uncurrying will
eliminate higher-order functions, which are likely to interfere
with the loop-oriented optimizations. Since the optimiza-
tions are applied to entire compilation units whichmaybe
whole programs, we paid close attention to algorithmic e-
ciency of individual optimization passes. Most of the passes
haveanONlogNworst-case asymptotic complexity ex-
cluding checking types for equality, whereNis program
size.
2.3Nearly Tag-Free Garbage Collection
Nearly tag-free garbage collection uses type information to
eliminate data representation restrictions due to garbage
collection.The basic idea is to record enough represen-
tation information at compile time so that, at any point
where a garbage collection can occur, it is possible to deter-
mine whether or not values are pointers and hence must be
traced by the garbage collector. Recording the information
at compile time makes it possible for code to use untagged
representations. Unlike so-called conservative collectors see
y TIL is
sucient to collect all unreachable objects.
Collection is \nearly" tag-free because tags are placed
only on heap-allocated data structures records and arrays
values in registers, on the stack, and within data structures
remain tagless.We construct the tags for monomorphic
records and arrays at compile time. For records or arrays
with unknown componenttypes, wemay need to construct
tags partially at run time. As with other polymorphic oper-
ations, weuseintensional polymorphism to construct these
tags.
Registers and components of stack frames are not tagged.
Instead, we generate tables at compile time that describe
the layout of registers and stack frames. We associate these
tables with the addresses of call sites within functions at
compile time. When garbage collection is invoked, the col-
lector scans the stack, using the return address of each frame
as an index into the table. The collector looks up the lay-
out of eachstack-frame to determine which stacklocations
to trace. We record additional liveness information for each
variable to avoid tracing pointers that are no longer needed.
This approachiswell-understood for monomorphic lan-
ollowing Tolmach
e extended it to a polymorphic language as follows:
when a variable whose type is unknown is saved in a stack
frame, the type of the variable is also saved in the stack
frame. However, unlikeTolmach, weevaluate substitutions
2
of ground types for type variables eagerly instead of lazily.
This is due in part for tec Chapter
void a class of space leaks that might
result with lazy substitution.
3Compilation Phases of TIL
Figure 1 shows the various compilation phases of TIL. The
phases through and including closure conversion use a typed
intermediate language. The phase after closure conversion
use an untyped language where variables are annotated with
garbage collection information. The low-level phases of the
compiler use languages where registers are annotated with
garbage collection information.
The following sections describe the phases of TIL and
the intermediate languages they use in more detail.
3.1Front-end
The rst phase of TIL uses the front-end of the ML Kit
ype check SML source
code. The Kit produces annotated abstract syntax for all of
SML and then compiles a subset of this abstract syntax to
an explicitly-typed core language called Lambda. The com-
pilation to Lambda eliminates pattern matching and various
derived forms.
We extended Lambda to support signatures, structures
modules, and separate compilation. Each source module
is compiled to a Lambda module with an explicit list of
imported modules and their signatures.Imported signa-
tures may include transparent denitions of types dened in
other modules hence TIL supports a limited form oftranslu-
centmanifestttly, the mapping to
Lambda does not handle signatures, nested structures, or
functors. In principle, however, all of these constructs are
supported by TIL's intermediate languages.
3.2Lmli and Type-Directed Optimizations
ML
Lmli, which stands fortensionally polymor-
i
phic language that provides explicit support for construct-
ing, passing, and analyzing types at run-time. We use these
constructs in the translation of Lambda to Lmli to provide
ecient data representations for user-dened datatypes, multi-
argument functions, tag-free polymorphic equality, and spe-
cialized arrays.
After the conversion from Lambda to Lmli, TIL performs
a series of type-directed optimizations. SML provides only
single-argument functions multiple arguments are passed in
a record. The rst optimization, argument attening, trans-
lates each function whichtakes a record as an argumentto
a function whichtakes the components of the record as mul-
tiple arguments. These arguments are passed in registers,
avoiding allocation to create the record and memory op-
erations to access record components. If a function takes
an argumentofvariable type, then weusetypecaseto
determine the proper calling convention, according to the
instantiation ofat run time.
As with functions, datatype constructors in SML take
a single argument. For example, the cons data construc-
tor :: for anlist takes a single record, consisting of
anvalue and anlistvalue. Naively, such a construc-
tor is represented as a pair consisting of a tag e.g.,cons,
and a pointer to the record containing thevalue and the
listvalue. The tag is a small integer value used to distin-
guish among the constructors of a datatype e.g.,nilvs.
::. Constructor attening rewrites all constructors that
take records as arguments so that the components of the
records are attened.In addition, constructor attening
eliminates tag components when they are unneeded.For
example, cons applied tohd,tlis simply represented as a
pointer to the pairhd,tl, since suchapointer can always
be distinguished fromnil. If the constructor takes an argu-
ment of unknown type, then weusetypecaseto determine
the proper representation, according to the instantiation of
at run time.
Because lists are used often in SML, the SMLNJ com-
piler also attens cons cells and other constructors. How-
ev
vents programmers from abstracting the type of these con-
structors, in order to prevent representation mismatches be-
tween denitions of abstract datat
contrast, TIL supports fully abstract datatype components,
but uses intensional polymorphism to determine representa-
tions of abstract datatypes, potentially at run time.
In addition to specializing calling conventions and datatypes,
the conversion from Lambda to Lmli makes polymorphic
equality explicit as a term in the language. Also, arrays are
specialized into one of three cases: int arrays, oat arrays,
and pointer arrays.Intensional polymorphism is used to
select the appropriate creation, subscript, and update oper-
ations for polymorphic arrays.
Finally,TILboxes all oating pointvalues, except for
values stored in oating-point arrays.Wechose to box
oats to make record operations faster, since typical SML
code manipulates many records but few oats.The is-
sue is that oating-pointvalues are 64 bits, while other
scalars and pointers are 32 bits. If oats were unboxed, then
record oset calculations could not always be done at com-
pile time. Fortunately, the optimizer later eliminates un-
ecessary boxunbox operations during the constant-folding
phase, so straight-line oating point code still runs fast.
In all, the combination of type-directed optimizations re-
duce running times by roughly 40 and allocation by 50
wever, much of this improvement can
be realized by other techniques For example, SMLNJ uses
Leroy's unboxing technique to achieve comparable improve-
ments for calling convenantage of our
approach is that weuseasinglemechanism intensional
polymorphism to specialize calling conventions, atten con-
structors, unbox oating-pointarrays, and eliminating tags
for both polymorphic equality and garbage collection.
3.3Optimizations
TIL employs an extensive set of optimizations. The opti-
mizations include most of those typically done by compilers
for functional languages.They also include loop-oriented
optimizations, suchasinvariant removal, applied to recur-
sive functions.
TIL rst translates Lmli to a subset of Lmli called Bform.
Bform, based on A-Normal-F
termediate language than Lmli that facilitates optimization.
The translation from Lmli names all intermediate computa-
tions and binds them to variables byalet-construct. It
also names all potentially heap-allocated values, including
strings, records and functions.Finally, it allows nested
3
Front end
Conversion to Lmli
Type-directed
Typed intermediate
optimization
languages
Conventional and
loop optimizations
Closure conversion
Conversion to untyped
language with gc info.
Conversion to RTL
Registers annotated
with gc info
Register allocation
Assembly
Figure 1: Phases of the TIL compiler
parse, elaborate, eliminate
pattern matching
introduce intensional polymorphism,
choose data representations
flatten args,
flatten constructors,
box floats
do inlining, uncurrying, constant-
folding, CSE, invariant removal,
etc.
close functions,
choose environment representations
calculate gc info for variables,
choose representation for types
choose machine representation
for variables, introduce tagging
for records and arrays
do graph-coloring register
allocation, construct tables for gc
4
letexpressions only within switches branch expressions.
Hence, the translation from Lmli to Bform linearizes andalwaystrueat that point.
names nested computations and values.
After translation to Bform, TIL performs the following
conventional transformations:
alpha-conversion:Bound variables are uniquely re-TIL assigns alet-bound variable and the expression
named.
dead-code elimination:unreferenced, pure expres-
sions and functions are eliminated.
uncurrying:Curried functions are transformed to
multi-argument functions, when possible.
constant folding:Arithmetic operations, switches,
and typecases on constantvalues are reduced, as well
as projections from known records.
sinking:Pure expressions used in only one branchof
a switch are pushed into that branch. However, such
expressions are not pushed into function denitions.
inlining:Non-escaping functions that are called only
once are always inlined. Small, non-recursive functions
are inlined in a bottom-up pass. Recursive functions
are never directly inlined.
inlining switchcontinuations:The continuation of
a switch is inlined when all but one branch raises an
exception. For example, the expression
let x = if y theneelse raisee
23
ine
4
end
is transformed to
if y then let x =eineend else raisee.
243
This makes expressions ineavailable withinefor
24
optimizations like common sub-expression elimination.
minimizingx:Mutually-recursive functions are bro-
ken into sets of strongly connected components. This
improves inlining and dead code elimination, by sepa-
rating non-recursive and recursive functions.
In addition to these standard functional language trans-
formations, TIL also applies loop-oriented optimizations to
recursive functions:
common subexpression elimination CSE:Given
an expression
let x =e
1
ine
2
end
ifeis pure or the only eect it mayhave is to raise an
1
exception, then all occurrences ofeineare replaced
12
withx. The only expressions that are excluded from
CSE are side-eecting expressions and function calls.
eliminating redundant switches:Given an expres-
sion
let x = if z then
let y = if z theneelsee
12
in ...
the nestedifstatement is replaced bye, sincezis
1
invariantremoval:Using the call graph, we calcu-
late the nesting depth of each function. Nesting-depth
is analogous to loop-nesting depth in languages likeC.
it binds a nesting depth equal to that of the nearest
enclosing function. For every pure expressione, if all
free variables ofehave a nesting depth less thane, TIL
moves the denition oferight after the denition of
the free variable with the highest lexical nesting depth.
hoisting:All constant expressions are hoisted to the
top of the program. An expression is a constant ex-
pression if it uses only constants or variables bound to
constant expressions.
eliminating redundant comparisons:A set of sim-
ple arithmetic relations of the formxyis propagated
top-down through the program. A \rule-of-signs" ab-
stract interpretation is used to determine signs of vari-
ables.This information is used to eliminate array-
bounds checks and other tests.
TIL applies the optimizations as follows: rst, it per-
forms a round of reduction optimizations, including dead-
code elimination, constant folding, inlining functions called
once, CSE, eliminating redundant switches, and invariant
removal. These optimizations do not increase program size
and should result in faster code. It iterates these optimiza-
tions until no further reductions occur. Then it performs
switch-continuation inlining, sinking, uncurrying, compar-
ison elimination, x minimizing, and inlining.The entire
process, starting with the reduction optimizations, is iter-
ated two or more times.
3.4Closure conversion
TIL uses a type-directed, abstract closure conversion in the
style suggested b
convert Lmli-Bform programs to to Lmli-Closure programs.
Lmli-Closure is an extension of Lmli-Bform that provides
constructs for explicitly constructing closures and their en-
vironments.
For each escaping Bform function, TIL generates a closed
piece of code, a type environment,andavalue environment.
The code takes the free type variables and free value vari-
ables of the original function as extra arguments. The types
and values corresponding to these free variables are placed in
records. These records are paired with the code to form an
abstract closure. TIL uses a at environment representation
for type and value environmen
For known functions, TIL generates closed code but avoids
creating environments or a closure. Folloe
modify the call sites of known functions to pass free variables
as additional arguments.
TIL closes over only variables which are function argu-
ments or are bound within functions. The locations of other
\top-level" variables are resolved at compile-time through
traditional linking, so their values do not need to be stored
in a closure.
5
3.5Conversion to an untyped language
To simplify the conversion to low-level assembly code, TIL
translates Lmli-Closure programs to an untyped language
called Ubform. Ubform is a much simpler language than
Lmli, since similar type-level and term-level constructs are
collapsed to the same term-level constructor.For exam-
ple, in the translation from Lmli-Closure to Ubform, TIL
replacestypecasewith a conventionalswitchexpression.
This simplies generation of low-level code, since there are
many fewer cases.
TIL annotates variables withrepresentation information
that tells the garbage collector what kinds of values variables
must contain e.g., pointers, integers, oats, or pointers to
code. The representation of a variablexmay be unknown
at compile time, in which case the representation informa-
tion is the name of the variableythat will contain the type
ofxat run time.
3.6Conversion to RTL
Next TIL converts Ubform programs to RTL,a register-transfer
language similar to ALPHA or other RISC-style assembly
language. RTL provides an innite number of pseudo-registers
each of which is annotated with representation informa-
tion.Representation information is extended to include
locatives, which are pointers into the middle of objects.
Pseudo-registers containing locatives are never live across a
point where garbage collection can occur. RTL also provides
heavy-weight function call and return mechanisms, and a
form of interprocedural goto for implementing exceptions.
The conversion of Ubform to RTL decides whether Ub-
form variables will be represented as constants, labels, or
pseudo-registers. It also eliminates exceptions, inserts tag-
ging operations for records and arrays, and inserts garbage
collection checks.
3.7Register allocation and assembly
Before doing register allocation, TIL converts RTL programs
to ALPHA assembly language with extensions similar to
those for RTL. Then TIL uses conventional graph-coloring
register allocation to allocate physical registers for the pseudo-
registers.It also generates tables describing layout and
garbage collection information for eachstackframe,asde-
scribed in Section 2.3. Finally, TIL generates actual ALPHA
assembly language and invokes the system assembler, which
does instruction scheduling and creates a standard object
le.
4An example
This section shows an ML function as it passes through theFigure 7 shows the actual DEC ALPHA assembly lan-
various stages of TIL. The following SML code denes a dot
product function that is the inner loop of the integer matrix
multiply benchmark:
val sub2 : 'a array2 * int * int - 'a
fun dotcnt,sum=
if cntbound then
let val sum'=sum+sub2A,i,cnt*sub2B,cnt,j
in dotcnt+1,sum'
end
else sum
The functionsub2is a built-in 2-d array subscript function
which the front end expands to
fun sub2 fcolumns,rows,vg, s :int, t:int =
if s 0 orelse s=rows orelse t0 orelse
t=columns then raise Subscript
else unsafe
sub1v,s * columns + t
Figures 2 through 7 show the actual intermediate code
created asdotandsub2pass through the various stages
of TIL. For readability,wehave renamed variables, erased
type information, and performed some minor optimizations,
such as eliminating selections of elds from known records.
Figure 2 shows the functions after they have been con-
verted to Lmli. Thesub2function takes a type as an ar-
gument. A function parameterized byatype is written as
t., while a function parameterized byavalue is written as
i.In thedotfunction, thesub2function is rst applied to
atypeand then applied to its actual values. Each function
takes only one argument, often a record, from which elds
are selected. The qualityofcodeatthislevel is quite poor:
there are eight function applications, four record construc-
tions, and numerous checks for array bounds.
Figure 3 shows the Lmli fragment after it has been con-
verted to Lmli-Bform. Functions have been transformed to
takemultiple arguments instead of records and every inter-
mediate compuation is named.
Figure 4 shows the Lmli-Bform fragment after it has been
optimized. All the function applications in the body of the
loop have been eliminated.psubaiav,ais an applica-
tion of the unsafe integer array subscript primitive. All of
the comparisons for array bounds checking have been safely
eliminated, and the body of the loop consists of 9 expres-
sions. This loop could be improved even further wehaveyet
to implementany form of strength reduction and induction
variable elimination.
Figure 5 shows the Lmli-Bform fragment after it has been
converted to Ubform. Eachvariable is now annotated with
representation information,tobeusedby the garbage col-
lector.INTdenotes integers andTRACEdenotes pointers to
tagged objects.The function is nowclosed, since it was
closure converted before converting to Ubform.
Figure 6 shows the Ubform fragment after it has been
converted to RTL. Every pseudo-register is now annotated
with precise representation information for the collector.
The representation information has been extended to in-
cludeLOCATIVE, which denotes pointers into the middle of
tagged objects.Locatives cannot be live across garbage-
collection points. The*indicates points where thepsubai
primitive has been expanded to twoRTL instructions. This
indicates that induction-variable elimination would also be
protable at the RTL level. Thereturninstruction's operand
is a pseudo-register containing the return address.
guage generated for thedotfunction.Thecodebetween
L1andL3corresponds to the RTL code. The other code
is epilogue and prologue code for entering and exiting the
function. Note that no tagging operations occur anywhere
in this function.
5Performance
In this section, we compare the performance of programs
compiled by TIL against programs compiled by the SMLNJ
6
sub2 =
let fix f =ty.
let fix g =arg.
let a = 0 arg
s = 1 arg
t = 2 arg
columns = 0 a
rows = 1 a
v = 2 a
check =
let test1 = plstis,0
in Switchenum test of
1=.enum1
|0=.
let test2 = pgteis,rows
in Switchenum test2 of
1=.enum1
|0=.
let test3 = plstit,0
inSwitchenum test3 of
1=.enum1
|0=.pgteit,columns
end
end
end
in Switchenum check of
1=.raise Subscript
|0=.unsafefv,t + s * columnsg
end
in g
in f
end
fix dot=
i.let cnt = 0 i
sum = 1 i
d = plsticnt,bound
inSwitchenum d
of1=.let sum' = sum +
fA,i,cntg*
fB,cnt,jg
indotfcnt+1,sum'g
end
|0=.sum
end
Figure 2: After conversion to Lmli
sub2 = ...
fix dot =cnt,sum.
let test = plsticnt, bound
r=
Switchenum test of
1=.
b = aA,i,cnt
d = cB,cnt,j
e = b*d
f = sum+e
g = cnt+1
h = dotg,f
in h
end
|0=.sum
inr
end
Figure 3: Lmli-Bform before optimization
fix dot =
cnt,sum.
let test = plsticnt,bound
r = Switchenum test of
1=
.
let a = t1 + cnt
b = psubaiav,a
c = columns * cnt
d=j+c
e = psubaibv,d
f = b*e
g = sum+f
h = 1+cnt
i = doth,g
ini
end
|0=.sum
inr
end
Figure 4: Lmli-Bform after optimization
fix dot =
bound:INT,columns:INT,bv:TRACE,av:TRACE,t1:INT,
j:INT,cnt:INT,sum:INT.
let test:INT = pgttibound,cnt
r:INT =
Switchint test of
1=
let a:INT = t1 + cnt
b:INT = psubaiav,a
c:INT = columns * cnt
d:INT = j + c
e:INT = psubaibv,d
f:INT = b*e
g:INT = sum+f
h:INT = 1+cnt
i:INT = dotbound,columns,bv,
av,t1,j,h,g
in i
end
| 0 = sum
inr
end : INT
Figure 5: After conversion to Ubform
7
dotboundINT,columnsINT,bvTRACE,
avTRACE,t1INT,jINT,cntINT,
sumINT,
fL0:pgt bound INT , cntINT , testINT
bne testINT,L1
mv sumINT,result INT
br L2
L1:addl t1INT , cntINT , aINT
*s4add aINT , avTRACE , t2LOCATIVE
*ldl bINT , 0t2LOCATIVE
mull columnsINT , cntINT , c INT
addl jINT , cINT , d INT
*s4add d INT , bvTRACE , t3LOCATIVE
*ldl e INT , 0t3 LOCATIVE
mullv b INT , e INT , fINT
addlv sumINT , f INT , g INT
addlv cntINT , 1 , h INT
trapb
mv h INT,cntINT
mv g INT,sumINT
br L0
L2:return retregLABELg
Figure 6: After conversion to RTL
compiler. We measure execution time, heap allocation, phys-
ical memory requirements, executable size, and compile time.
We also measure the eect of loop optimizations. Further
T
5.1Benchmarks
Table 1 describes the benchmark programs, which range in
size from 62 lines to about 2000 lines of code. Some of these
programs have been used previously for measuring ML per-
hmarks cover a range of appli-
cation areas including scientic computing, list-processing,
systems programming, and compilers.
We compiled the programs as single closed modules. For
Lexgen and Simple, which are standard bence
eliminated functors by hand because TIL does not yet sup-
port the full SML module language.Because whole pro-
grams were given to the compiler, we found that the opti-
mizer naturally eliminated all polymorphic functions. Con-
sequently, for this benchmark suite, there was no run-time
cost to support intensional polymorphism.
We extended the built-in ML types with safe 2-dimensionalldq$9, 16$sp
arrays. The 2-d array operations do bounds checking on each
dimension and then use unsafe 1-d array operations. Arrays
are stored in column-major order.
5.2Comparison against SMLNJ
We compared the performance of TIL against SMLNJ in
several dimensions: execution time, total heap allocation,
physical memory footprint, the size of the executable, and
compilation time.
For TIL, we compiled programs with all optimizations
enabled. For SMLNJ, we compiled programs using the de-
fault optimization settings. We used a recentinternal release
of SMLNJ a variantofversion 1.08, since it produces code
that is about 35 faster than the current standard release
.ent Lv2851dot205955
$bound,$
 results$result,$0
 return addr$retreg,$26
 destroys:$0$1$2$3$4$5$6$7$27
Lv2851dot205955:
.mask 1  26, -32
.frame $sp, 32, $26
.prologue 1
ldgp$gp, $27
lda$sp, -32$sp
stq$26, $sp
stq$8, 8$sp
stq$9, 16$sp
mov$26, $27
L1:
cmplt$6, $0, $8
bne$8, L2
mov$7, $1
br$31, L3
L2:
addl$4, $6, $8
s4addl$8, $3, $8
ldl$8, $8
mull$1, $6, $9
addl$5, $9, $9
s4addl$9, $2, $9
ldl$9, $9
mullv$8, $9, $8
addlv$7, $8, $7
addlv$6, 1, $6
trapb
br$31, L1
L3:
mov$1, $0
mov$27, $26
ldq$8, 8$sp
lda$sp, 32$sp
ret$31, $26, 1
.end Lv2851dot205955
Figure 7: Actual DEC ALPHA assembly language
8
Programlines
Checksum241Checksum fragmentfromtheFohecksums on a 4096-byte
array.
FFT246Fast fourier transform, multiplying polynomials up to degree 65,536
Knuth-Bendix618An implementation of the Knuth-Bendix completion algorithm.
Lexgen1123
ML.
Life146The game of Life implemen
Matmult62Integer matrix multiply, on 200x200 integer arrays.
PIA2065The PerspectiveInv
perspective video image.
Simple870
Table 1: Benchmark Programs
TIL always prexes a set of operations on to eachmod-
ule that it compiles, in order to facilitate optimization. This
\inline" prelude contains 2-d array operations, commonly-
used list functions, and so forth.Toavoid handicapping
SMLNJ, we created separate copies of the benchmark pro-
grams for SMLNJ, and placed equivalent \prelude" code
at the beginning of each program byhand.
Since TIL creates stand-alone executables, weusedthe
exportFnfacility of SMLNJ to create stand-alone programs.
TheexportFnfunction of SMLNJ dumps part of the heap
to disk and throws away the interactive system.
We measured execution time on DEC ALPHA AXP 3000-
300LX workstations, running OSF1, version 2.0, using the
UNIXgetrusagefunction. For SMLNJ, we started timing
after the heap had been reloaded. For TIL, we measured the
entire execution time of the process, including load time. We
made 5 runs of each program on an unloaded workstation
and chose the lowest execution time. Eachworkstation had
96MBytes of physical memory, so paging was not a factor in
the measurements.
We measured total heap allocation by instrumenting the
TIL run-time system to count the bytes allocated. We used
existing instrumentation in the SMLNJ run-time system.
We measured the maximum amountofphysical memory
during execution usinggetrusage.Weusedthesizepro-
gram to measure the size of executables for TIL. For SMLNJ,
we used thesizeprogram to measure the size of the run-
time system and then added the size of the heap created
byexportFn. Finally,we measured end-to-end compilation
time, including time to assemble les produced byTIL.
Figures 8 through 11 present the measurements the raw
numbers are in Appendix??. For eachbenchmark, mea-
surements for TIL were normalized to those for SMLNJ
and then graphed. SMLNJ performance is the 100 mark
on all the graphs.
Figure 8 presents relative running times. On average,
programs compiled by TIL run 3.3 times faster than pro-
grams compiled by SMLNJ. In fact, all programs except
Knuth-BendixandLifeare substantially faster when com-
piled by TIL. We speculate that less of a speed-up is seen
forKnuth-BendixandLifebecause they makeheavy use of
list-processing, which SMLNJ does a good job of compiling.
Figure 9 compares the relativeamounts of heap alloca-
tion. On average, the amount of data heap-allocated bythe
TIL program is about 17 of the amount allocated bythe
SMLNJ program. This is not surprising, because TIL uses
astack while SMLNJ allocates frames on the heap.
Description
125
100
75
50
25
lexgen
CksumFFTKBLifeMmultPIASIMPLE
Figure 8: TIL Execution Time RelativetoSMLNJ
Figure 10 presents the relative maximum amounts of
physical memory used. On average, TIL programs use half
the memory used by SMLNJ programs. We see that oating-
point programs use the least amount of memory relativeto
comparable SMLNJ programs. We speculate that this is
due to TIL's abilitytokeep oating values unboxed when
stored in arrays.
TIL stand-alone programs are about half the size of stand-
alone heaps and the runtime system of SMLNJ. The dier-
ence in size is mostly due to the dierent sizes of the runtime
systems and standard libraries for the two compilers. TIL's
runtime system is about 100K, while SMLNJ's runtime is
about 425K. The program sizes for TIL conrm that gener-
ating tables for nearly tag-free garbage collection consumes
a modest amount of space, and that the inlining strategy
used by TIL produces code of reasonable size.
Figure 11 compares compilation times for TIL and SMLNJ.
SMLNJ does much better than TIL when it comes to com-
pilation time, compiling about eight times faster. However,
wehaveyet to tune TIL for compilation speed.
5.3Loop-Oriented Optimizations
We also investigated the eect of the loop-oriented optimiza-
tions CSE, invariantremoval, hoisting, comparison elimi-
nation, and redundant switch elimination. For eachbench-
mark, we compared performance with the loop optimiza-
9
100
75
50
25
Lexgen
CksumFFTKBLifeMmultPIASIMPLE
Figure 9: TIL Heap Allocation Relative to SMLNJ
100
75
50
25
Lexgen
CksumFFTKBLifeMmultPIASIMPLE
Figure 10: TIL Physical Memory Used Relative to SMLNJ
2000
1500
1000
500
100
Lexgen
CksumFFTKBLifeMmultPIASIMPLE
Figure 11: Til Compilation Time Relative to SMLNJ
Exec timeExec time
optnoopt
Heap AllocHeap Alloc
optnoopt
125
100
75
50
25
Lexgen
CksumFFTKBLifeMmultPIASIMPLE
Figure 12: Eects of Loop Optimizations
tions against performance without the loop optimizations.
Figure 12 presents the ratios of execution time with the loop
optimizations to execution time without the loop optimiza-
tions, and similar ratios for total heap allocation. The loop
optimizations reduce execution time by 0 to 83, with a
median reduction of 39.The eect on heap allocation
ranges from an increase of 20 to a decrease of 96.5, with
a median decrease of 10.
Formatmult, the matrix multiplication function is small
enough that the optimizer inlines it, making the array di-
mensions known. If the array dimensions are held unknown,
then the loop optimizations speed upmatmultby a factor of
2.5.
6Related Work
Morrisonet al.used an \ad-hoc" approach to implement
polymorphism in their implemen
particular, they passed representations of types to polymor-
phic routines at run-time to determine behavior. However,
to our knowledge, Napier '88 did not use types to implement
tag-free garbage collection. Also, there is no description of
the internals of the Napier '88 compiler, nor is there an ac-
count of the performance of code generated by the compiler.
Peyton Jones and Launchbury suggested that types could
be used to unboxv
However, they only supported a limited set of \unboxed
types" ints and oats and restricted these types from in-
stantiating type variables.Later, Leroy suggested a gen-
eral approach for unboxing values based on the ML type
Leroy's approach has been extended and
implemen
compiler. It does not support unboxed arraycomponents
nor attened, recursive datatypes. Tolmacbined
Leroy's approach with tag-free garbage collection. However,
he used anad hocapproach to propagate type information
to the collector.
Other researchers have suggested that polymorphism should
be eliminated enyle
ents separate compilation
of a polymorphic denition from its uses. In contrast, in-
tensional polymorphism, and in particular the intermediate
10
forms of TIL, support separate compilation of polymorphicReferences
denitions, though wehaveyet to takeadvantage of this.
Tag-free garbage collection was originally proposed for
monomorphic languages likePascal, but has been used else-
ype
information with return addresses on the stac
suggested extending this technique to ML by using unica-
ved Appel's algorithm
ere im-
plemented due to the complexity of the algorithms and the
overhead of performing unication during garbage collec-
tion.
Aditya, Flood, and Hicks used type-passing to support
tly,
Tolmacted a type-passing garbage collec-
tion algorithm for ML. Our approach diers from others
by using \nearly" tag-free collection. In particular, records
and arrays on the heap are tagged. Another dierence is
that we calculate type environmentseagerly, while the other
implementations construct type environmentslazilyduring
garbage collection.
Loop-oriented optimizations are well-known for imper-
ativwever, few results are reported for
Lisp, Sc
common-subexpression elimination optimizations similar to
ours. Appel found that CSE was not useful in the SMLNJ
compiler. Serrano restricted CSE to pure expressions, while
our CSE handles expressions whichmay raise exceptions.
7Conclusions and future work
Our results show that for core-SML programs compiled as
a whole, intensional polymorphism can remove restrictions
on data representation, yet cost literally nothing due to the
eectiveness of optimization. They also show that loop op-
timizations can improve program performance signicantly.
These results suggest that ML can be compiled as well as
conventional languages suchasPascal. TIL produces code
that is similar in many important respects to code produced
byPascal and C compilers. For example, most function calls
are known, since few higher-order functions are left, integers
are untagged, and most code is monomorphic.
There are numerous areas that wewould liketoinvesti-
gate further. Wewould like to explore the eect of separate
compilation. With separate compilation, polymorphic func-
tions may be compiled separately from their uses, leading to
some cost for intensional polymorphism. Wewould liketo
measure this cost and explore what kinds of optimizations
can reduce it.
Another direction wewould liketoinvestigate is howthis
approach performs for larger programs. Wewould liketo
add support for more of the ML module system, since large
ML programs make extensive use of the module system. We
would also like to improve TIL's compile times, so that large
programs can also be compiled as a whole.
Finally,wewould like to continue improving the per-
formance of ML programs.Wewould like to extend our
register allocation strategy along the lines of Cho
Wewould also liketoinvestigate more
loop optimizations, such as strength-reduction, induction-
variable elimination, and loop unrolling. On a more specu-
lative note, wewould like to explore stack allocation of data
structures.
ya, Christine Flood, and James Hicks. Garbage
collection for strongly-typed languages using run-time type
reconstruction
vi Sethi, and Jerey D. Ullman.Com-
pilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools. AddisonWesley
Publishing Company, 1986.
Journal of Func-
tional Programming, 34:391429, October 1993.
time tags aren't necessary.Lisp and
Symbolic Computation, 2:153162, 1989.
Compiling with Continuations. Cam-
bridge University Press, 1992.
vid Tarditi.
A lexical analyzer generator for Standard ML. Distributed
with Standard ML of New Jersey, 1989.
eter Lee, and Brian
Milnes. Signatures for a network protocol stack: A systems
edal, Nick Rothwell, Mads Tofte, and David N.
Turner. The ML Kit, Version 1. Technical Report 9314,
DIKU, 1993.
h. NESL: A nested data-parallel language
version 2.6. Technical Report CMU-CS-93-129, School of
Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, April 1993.
t conservative garbage
. Branquart and J. Lewi. A scheme for storage allocation
and garbage collection for Algol-68. InAlgol-68 Implementa-
tion. North-Holland Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1970.
t for the
programming language Pascal. Master's thesis, University
of Arizona, 1975.
red C. Chow. Minimizing register usage penaltyatproce-
dure calls. InProceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN '88 Con-
ferenceonProgramming Language Design and Implementa-
tion, pages 8594, Atlanta, Georgia, June 1988. ACM.
eiser, B. Hayes, H. Boehm, D. Bobrow,
and S. Shenker. Combining generational and conservative
garbage collection: Framework and implementations.In
ConferenceRecord of the 17th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-
SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Lan-
guages,SanFrancisco, California, January 1990. ACM.
an, Eliot Moss, and Richard Hudson. Compiler
support for garbage collection in a statically typed language.
InProceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN '92 Conferenceon
Programming Language Design and Implementation,pages
273282, San Francisco, CA, June 1992. ACM.
an, David Tarditi, and Eliot Moss.Memory-
System Performance of Programs with Intensive Heap Al-
location.Transactions on Computer Systems, August 1995.
anadham and Arvind. SIMPLE: An exercise in fu-
ture scientic programming. Technical Report Computation
Structures Group Memo 273, MIT, Cambridge, MA, July
1987. Simultaneously published as IBMT. J. Watson Re-
search Center Research Report 12686, Yorktown Heights,
NY.
, Bruce F. Duba, and Matthias
Felleisen. The essence of compiling with continuations. In
ag-free garbage collection in strongly
typed programming languages. InProceedings of the ACM
SIGPLAN '91 ConferenceonProgramming Language De-
sign and Implementation, pages 165176, Toronto, Canada,
June 1991. ACM.
11
hael Gloger. Polymorphic type
reconstruction for garbage collection without tags. InPro-
ceedings of the 1992 ACM Conference on Lisp and Func-
tional Programming, pages 5365, San Francisco, California,hagen, April 1993. Master Dissertation.
June 1992. ACM.
eyton Jones, and Patrick M. San-
som. Unboxing using specialisation. In D. Turner K. Ham-
mond, P.M. Sandom, editor,Functional Programming, 1994.
Springer-Verlag, 1995.
ype-theoretic ap-
proach to higher-order modules with sharing. In POPL '94
37
phism using intensional type analysis. InConferenceRecord
of the 22nd Annual ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium
on Principles of Programming Languages, pages 130141,
San Francisco, California, January 1995. ACM.
ritz Henglein and Jesper Jrgensen. Formally optimal box-
. Jones. Partial evaluation for dictionary-freeoverload-
ing. Research Report YALEUDCSRR-959, Yale Univer-
sity, New Haven, Connecticut, USA, April 1993.
eyton Jones and John Launchbury.Unboxed values
as rst-class citizens. InProceedings of the Conferenceon
Functional Programming and Computer Architecture,vol-
ume 523 ofLecture Notes on Computer Science, pages 636
666. ACM, Springer-Verlag, 1991.
vid Kranz, Richard Kelsey, Jonathan Rees, Paul Hudak,
James Philbin, and Norman Adams. ORBIT: An Optimizing
Compiler for Scheme. InProceedings of the SIGPLAN '86
Symposium on Compiler Construction, pages 219233, Palo
Alto, California, June 1986. ACM.
vier Leroy.Unboxed objects and polymorphic typing.
InConferenceRecord of the 19th Annual ACM SIGPLAN-
SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Lan-
guages, pages 177188, Albuquerque, NM, January 1992.
ACM.
vier Leroy. Manifest types, modules, and separate compi-
37
30Proceedings of the 1994 ACM Conference on Lisp and Func-
tional Programming, Orlando, Florida, June 1994. ACM.
ofte, and Robert Harper.The Deni-
tion of StandardML. MIT Press, 1990.
Typed clo-
sure conversion. InConferenceRecord of the 23rdAnnual
ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Pro-
gramming Languages, St. Petersburg, Florida, January 1996.
ACM.
Compiling with Types. PhD thesis, School of
Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh,
PA, December 1995. Published as Technical Report CMU-
CS-95-226.
elleisen, and Robert Harper. Ab-
stract models of memory management. InACM Confer-
enceonFunctional Programming and Computer Architec-
ture, pages 6677, La Jolla, June 1995.
wn.
An ad hoc approach to the implementation of polymorphism.
ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Sys-
tems, 133:342371, July 1991.
36Proceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN '93 ConferenceonPro-
gramming Language Design and Implementation,Albu-
querque, New Mexico, June 1993. ACM.
37ConferenceRecord of the 21st Annual ACM SIGPLAN-
SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Lan-
guages,Portland, Oregon, January 1994. ACM.
oulsen. Representation analysis for ecient
implementation of polymorphism. Technical report, Depart-
ment of Computer Science DIKU, University of Copen-
Elements of Functional Programming.
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts, 1989.
ual Serrano and Pierre Weis. 1+1 = 1: an optimizing
CAML compiler. Technical Report 2264, INRIA, June 1994.
Compiling Standard ML for Ecient Execu-
tion on Modern Machines. PhD thesis, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey,November 1994.
ype-based compiler
for Standard ML. InProceedings of the ACM SIGPLAN '95
ConferenceonProgramming Language Design and Imple-
mentation, pages 116129, La Jolla, California, June 1994.
ACM.
eter Steenkiste. Advanced register allocation.InPeter Lee,
editor,Topics in AdvancedLanguage Implementation. MIT
Press, 1990.
The C++ Programming Language, 2nd
Edition. Addison-Wesley, 1991.
vid R. Tarditi.Optimizing ML. PhD thesis, School of
Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, 1996. Forth-
coming.
olmach. Tag-free garbage collection using explicit
t
augh, Patrick McAndrew, and Greg Michaelson.
Parallel implementations from function prototypes: a case
study.Technical Report Computer Science 904, Heriot-
Watt University,Edinburgh, August 1990.
.L. Wodon. Methods of garbage collection for Algol-68. In
Algol-68 Implementation. North-Holland Publishing Com-
pany, Amsterdam, 1970.
12
