=== page 1 ===
Formal V eriﬁcation of Translation Validators
A Case Study on Instruction Scheduling Optimizations
Jean-Baptiste Tristan
INRIA Paris-Rocquencourt
jean-baptiste.tristan@inria.fr
Xavier Leroy
INRIA Paris-Rocquencourt
xavier.leroy@inria.fr
Abstract
Translation validation consists of transforming a program and a
posteriori validating it in order to detect a modiﬁcation of its se-
mantics. This approach can be used in a veriﬁed compiler, pro-
vided that validation is formally proved to be correct. We present
two such validators and their Coq proofs of correctness. The val-
idators are designed for two instruction scheduling optimizations:
list scheduling and trace scheduling.
Categories and Subject Descriptors F.3.1 [Logics and Meanings
of Programs]: Specifying and V erifying and Reasoning about Pro-
grams - Mechanical veriﬁcation; F.3.2 [ Logics and Meanings of
Programs]: Semantics of Programming Languages - Operational
semantics; D.2.4 [ Software Engineering]: Software/Program V er-
iﬁcation - Correctness proofs; D.3.4 [ Programming Languages]:
Processors - Optimization
General Terms Languages, V eriﬁcation, Algorithms
Keywords Translation validation, scheduling optimizations, veri-
ﬁed compilers, the Coq proof assistant
1. Introduction
Compilers, and especially optimizing compilers, are complex
pieces of software that perform delicate code transformations and
static analyses over the programs that they compile. Despite heavy
testing, bugs in compilers (either in the algorithms used or in
their concrete implementation) do happen and can cause incorrect
object code to be generated from correct source programs. Such
bugs are particularly difﬁcult to track down because they are often
misdiagnosed as errors in the source programs. Moreover, in the
case of high-assurance software, compiler bugs can potentially
invalidate the guarantees established by applying formal methods
to the source code.
Translation validation, as introduced by Pnueli et al. (1998b),
is a way to detect such compiler bugs at compile-time, therefore
preventing incorrect code from being generated by the compiler
silently. In this approach, at every run of the compiler or of one of
the compiler passes, the input code and the generated code are fed
to a validator (a piece of software distinct from the compiler itself),
which tries to establish a posteriori that the generated code behaves
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute
to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee.
POPL’08, January 7–12, 2008, San Francisco, California, USA.
Copyright c© 2008 ACM 978-1-59593-689-9/08/0001. . . $5.00
as prescribed by the input code. The validator can use a variety
of techniques to do so, ranging from dataﬂow analyses (Huang
et al. 2006) to symbolic execution (Necula 2000; Rival 2004) to the
generation of a veriﬁcation condition followed by model checking
or automatic theorem proving (Pnueli et al. 1998b; Zuck et al.
2003). If the validator succeeds, compilation proceeds normally.
If, however, the validator detects a discrepancy, or is unable to
establish the desired semantic equivalence, compilation is aborted.
Since the validator can be developed independently from the
compiler, and generally uses very different algorithms than those
of the compiler, translation validation signiﬁcantly increases the
user’s conﬁdence in the compilation process. However, as unlikely
as it may sound, it is possible that a compiler bug still goes un-
noticed because of a matching bug in the validator. More prag-
matically, translation validators, just like type checkers and byte-
code veriﬁers, are difﬁcult to test: while examples of correct code
that should pass abound, building a comprehensive suite of incor-
rect code that should be rejected is delicate (Sirer and Bershad
1999). The guarantees obtained by translation validation are there-
fore weaker than those obtained by formal compiler veriﬁcation:
the approach where program proof techniques are applied to the
compiler itself in order to prove, once and for all, that the generated
code is semantically equivalent to the source code. (For background
on compiler veriﬁcation, see the survey by Dave (2003) and the
recent mechanized veriﬁcations of compilers described by Klein
and Nipkow (2006), Leroy (2006), Leinenbach et al. (2005) and
Strecker (2005).)
A crucial observation that drives the work presented in this pa-
per is that translation validation can provide formal correctness
guarantees as strong as those obtained by compiler veriﬁcation,
provided the validator itself is formally veriﬁed. In other words,
it sufﬁces to model the validator as a function V : Source×
Target→ boolean and prove that V (S, T ) = true implies the
desired semantic equivalence result between the source code S and
the compiled code T . The compiler or compiler pass itself does
not need to be proved correct and can use algorithms, heuristics
and implementation techniques that do not easily lend themselves
to program proof. We claim that for many optimization passes,
the approach outlined above — translation validation a posteriori
combined with formal veriﬁcation of the validator — can be sig-
niﬁcantly less involved than formal veriﬁcation of the compilation
pass, yet provide the same level of assurance.
In this paper, we investigate the usability of the “veriﬁed val-
idator” approach in the case of two optimizations that schedule
instructions to improve instruction-level parallelism: list schedul-
ing and trace scheduling. We develop simple validation algorithms
for these optimizations, based on symbolic execution of the orig-
inal and transformed codes at the level of basic blocks (for list
scheduling) and extended basic blocks after tail duplication (for
trace scheduling). We then prove the correctness of these validators
=== page 2 ===
against an operational semantics. The formalizations and proofs of
correctness are entirely mechanized using the Coq proof assistant
(Coq development team 1989–2007; Bertot and Cast ´eran 2004).
The formally veriﬁed instruction scheduling optimizations thus ob-
tained integrate smoothly within the Compcert veriﬁed compiler
described in (Leroy 2006; Leroy et al. 2003–2007).
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
recalls basic notions about symbolic evaluation and its uses for
translation validation. Section 3 presents the Mach intermediate
language over which scheduling and validation are performed. Sec-
tions 4 and 5 present the validators for list scheduling and trace
scheduling, respectively, along with their proofs of correctness.
Section 6 discusses our Coq mechanization of these results. Sec-
tion 7 presents some experimental data and discusses algorithmic
efﬁciency issues. Related work is discussed in section 8, followed
by concluding remarks in section 9.
2. Translation validation by symbolic execution
2.1 Translation validation and compiler veriﬁcation
We model a compiler or compiler pass as a function L1→ L2 +
Error, where the Error result denotes a compile-time failure, L1
is the source language and L2 is the target language for this pass.
(In the case of instruction scheduling, L1 and L2 will be the same
intermediate language, Mach, described in section 3.)
Let≤ be a relation between a program c1∈ L1 and a program
c2 ∈ L2 that deﬁnes the desired semantic preservation property
for the compiler pass. In this paper, we say that c1≤ c2 if, when-
ever c1 has well-deﬁned semantics and terminates with observable
result R, c2 also has well-deﬁned semantics, also terminates, and
produces the same observable result R. We say that a compiler
C : L1 → L2 + Error is formally veriﬁed if we have proved
that
∀c1∈ L1, c2∈ L2, C (c1) = c2 ⇒ c1≤ c2 (1)
In the translation validation approach, the compiler pass is com-
plemented by a validator: a function L1× L2→ boolean. A val-
idator V is formally veriﬁed if we have proved that
∀c1∈ L1, c2∈ L2, V (c1, c2) = true ⇒ c1≤ c2 (2)
Let C be a compiler and V a validator. The following function
CV deﬁnes a compiler from L1 to L2:
CV (c1) = c2 if C(c1) = c2 and V (c1, c2) = true
CV (c1) = Error if C(c1) = c2 and V (c1, c2) = false
CV (c1) = Error if C(c1) = Error
The line of work presented in this paper follows from the trivial
theorem below.
Theorem 1. If the validator V is formally veriﬁed in the sense of
(2), then the compiler CV is formally veriﬁed in the sense of (1).
In other terms, the veriﬁcation effort for the derived compiler
CV reduces to the veriﬁcation of the validator V . The original
compiler C itself does not need to be veriﬁed and can be treated as
a black box. This fact has several practical beneﬁts. First, programs
that we need to verify formally must be written in a programming
language that is conducive to program proof. In the Compcert
project, we used the functional subset of the speciﬁcation language
of the Coq theorem prover as our programming language. This
makes it very easy to reason over programs, but severely constrains
our programming style: program written in Coq must be purely
functional (no imperative features) and be proved to terminate. In
our veriﬁed validator approach, only the validator V is written in
Coq. The compiler C can be written in any programming language,
using updateable data structures and other imperative features if
necessary. There is also no need to ensure that C terminates. A
second beneﬁt of translation validation is that the base compiler
C can use heuristics or probabilistic algorithms that are known
to generate correct code with high probability, but not always.
The rare instances where C generates wrong code will be caught
by the validator. Finally, the same validator V can be used for
several optimizations or variants of the same optimization. The
effort of formally verifying V can therefore be amortized over
several optimizations.
Given two programs c1 and c2, it is in general undecidable
whether c1 ≤ c2. Therefore, the validator is in general incom-
plete: the reverse implication ⇐ in deﬁnition (2) does not hold,
potentially causing false alarms (a correct code transformation is
rejected at validation time). However, we can take advantage of
our knowledge of the class of transformations performed by the
compiler pass C to develop a specially-adapted validator V that
is complete for these transformations. For instance, the validator of
Huang et al. (2006) is claimed to be complete for register allocation
and spilling. Likewise, the validators we present in this paper are
specialized to the code transformations performed by list schedul-
ing and trace scheduling, namely reordering of instructions within
a basic block or an extended basic block, respectively.
2.2 Symbolic execution
Following Necula (2000), we use symbolic execution as our main
tool to show semantic equivalence between code fragments. Sym-
bolic execution of a basic block represents the values of variables
at the end of the block as symbolic expressions involving the val-
ues of the variables at the beginning of the block. For instance, the
symbolic execution of
z := x + y;
t := z × y
is the following mapping of variables to expressions
z ↦→ x0 + y0
t ↦→ (x0 + y0)× y0
v ↦→ v0 for all other variables v
where v0 symbolically denotes the initial value of variable v at the
beginning of the block.
Symbolic execution extends to memory operations if we con-
sider that they operate over an implicit argument and result, Mem,
representing the current memory state. For instance, the symbolic
execution of
store(x, 12);
y := load(x)
is
Mem ↦→ store(Mem0, x0, 12)
y ↦→ load(store(Mem0, x0, 12), x0)
v ↦→ v0 for all other variables v
The crucial observation is that two basic blocks that have the
same symbolic evaluation (identical variables are mapped to iden-
tical symbolic expressions) are semantically equivalent, in the fol-
lowing sense: if both blocks successfully execute from an ini-
tial state Σ, leading to ﬁnal states Σ1 and Σ2 respectively, then
Σ1 = Σ 2.
Necula (2000) goes further and compares the symbolic evalua-
tions of the two code fragments modulo equations such as compu-
tation of arithmetic operations (e.g. 1 + 2 = 3 ), algebraic prop-
erties of these operations (e.g. x + y = y + x or x× 4 =
x << 2), and “good variable” properties for memory accesses (e.g.
=== page 3 ===
load(store(m, p, v), p) = v). This is necessary to validate trans-
formations such as constant propagation or instruction strength re-
duction. However, for the instruction scheduling optimizations that
we consider here, equations are not necessary and it sufﬁces to
compare symbolic expressions by structure.
The semantic equivalence result that we obtain between blocks
having identical symbolic evaluations is too weak for our purposes:
it does not guarantee that the transformed block executes without
run-time errors whenever the original block does. Consider:
x := 1 x := x / 0
x := 1
Both blocks have the same symbolic evaluation, namely x↦→ 1
and v↦→ v0 if v⁄= x. However, the rightmost block crashes at run-
time on a division by 0, and is therefore not a valid optimization
of the leftmost block, which does not crash. To address this issue,
we enrich symbolic evaluation as follows: in addition to comput-
ing a mapping from variables to expressions representing the ﬁnal
state, we also maintain a set of all arithmetic operations and mem-
ory accesses performed within the block, represented along with
their arguments as expressions. Such expressions, meaning “this
computation is well deﬁned”, are called constraints by lack of a
better term. In the example above, the set of constraints is empty
for the leftmost code, and equal to {x0/0} for the rightmost code.
To validate the transformation of a block b1 into a block b2,
we now do the following: perform symbolic evaluation over b1,
obtaining a mapping m1 and a set of constraints s1; do the same
for b2, obtaining m2, s2; check that m2 = m1 and s2⊆ s1. This
will guarantee that b2 executes successfully whenever b1 does, and
moreover the ﬁnal states will be identical.
3. The Mach intermediate language
The language that we use to implement our scheduling transforma-
tions is the Mach intermediate language outlined in (Leroy 2006).
This is the lowest-level intermediate language in the Compcert
compilation chain, just before generation of PowerPC assembly
code. At the Mach level, registers have been allocated, stack loca-
tions reserved for spilled temporaries, and most Mach instructions
correspond exactly to single PowerPC instructions. This enables
the scheduler to perform precise scheduling. On the other hand,
the semantics of Mach is higher-level than that of a machine lan-
guage, guaranteeing in particular that terminating function calls are
guaranteed to return to the instruction following the call; this keeps
proofs of semantic preservation more manageable than if they were
conducted over PowerPC assembly code.
3.1 Syntax
A Mach program is composed of a set of functions whose bodies
are lists of instructions.
Mach instructions:
i ::= setstack(r, τ, δ) register to stack move
| getstack(τ, δ, r) stack to register move
| getparam(τ, δ, r) caller’s stack to reg. move
| op(op, ⃗ r, r) arithmetic operation
| load(chunk , mode, ⃗ r, r) memory load
| store(chunk , mode, ⃗ r, r) memory store
| call(r| id ) function call
| label(l) branch target label
| goto(l) unconditional branch
| cond(cond, ⃗ r, ltrue ) conditional branch
| return function return
Mach functions:
f ::= fun id
{ stack n1; frame n2; code ⃗ ı}
Mach offers an assembly-level view of control ﬂow, using labels
and branches to labels. In conditional branches cond, cond is
the condition being tested and ⃗ rits arguments. Instructions are
similar to those of the processor and include arithmetic and logical
operations op, as well as memory load and stores; arguments and
results of these instructions are processor registers r. op ranges over
the set of operations of the processor and mode over the set of
addressing modes. In memory accesses, chunk indicates the kind,
size and signedness of the memory datum being accessed.
To access locations in activation records where temporaries
are spilled and callee-save registers are saved, Mach offers spe-
ciﬁc getstack and setstack instructions, distinct from load and
store. The location in the activation record is identiﬁed by a type
τ and a byte offset δ. getparam reads from the activation record of
the calling function, where excess parameters to the call are stored.
These special instructions enable the Mach semantics to enforce
useful separation properties between activation records and the rest
of memory.
3.2 Dynamic semantics
The operational semantics of Mach is given in a combination of
small-step and big-step styles, as three mutually inductive predi-
cates:
Σ ⊣ ⃗ ı, R, F, M→ ⃗ ı′, R′, F ′, M ′ one instruction
Σ ⊣ ⃗ ı, R, F, M
∗
→ ⃗ ı′, R′, F ′, M ′ several instructions
G ⊣ f , P, R, M⇒ R′, M ′ function call
The ﬁrst predicate deﬁnes one transition within the current function
corresponding to the execution of the ﬁrst instruction in the list
⃗ ı. R maps registers to values, F maps activation record locations
to values, and M is the current memory state. The context Σ =
(G, f , sp, P) is a quadruple of the set G of global function and
variable deﬁnitions, f the function being executed, sp the stack
pointer, and P the activation record of the caller. The following
excerpts should give the ﬂavor of the semantics.
v = eval op(op, R(⃗ r))
Σ⊣ op(op, ⃗ r, rd) :: c, R, F, M→ c, R{rd← v}, F, M
true = eval condition(cond, R(⃗ r))
c′ = find label(ltrue , f .code)
(G, f , sp, P)⊣ cond(cond, ⃗ r, ltrue ) :: c, R, F, M→ c′, R, F, M
When a call instruction is executed, the semantics transitions
not to the ﬁrst instruction in the callee, but to the instruction fol-
lowing the call in the caller. This transition takes as premise an
execution G⊣ f , P, R, M ⇒ R′, M ′ of the body of the called
function, as shown by the following rules.
G(R(rf )) = f G⊣ f , F, R, M⇒ R′, M ′
(G, f , sp, P)⊣ call(rf ) :: c, R, F, M→ c, R′, F, M ′
alloc(M, 0, f .stack) = ( sp, M1)
init frame(f .frame) = F1
G, f , sp, P⊣ f .code, R, F1, M1
∗
→ return :: c′, R′, F2, M2
M ′ = free(M2, sp)
G⊣ f , P, R, M⇒ R′, M ′
4. Validation of list scheduling
List scheduling is the simplest instruction scheduling optimization.
Like all optimizations of its kind, it reorders instructions in the pro-
gram to increase instruction-level parallelism, by taking advantage
=== page 4 ===
of pipelining and multiple functional units. In order to preserve pro-
gram semantics, reorderings of instructions must respect the fol-
lowing rules, where ρ is a resource of the processor (e.g. a register,
or the memory):
• Write-After-Read: a read from ρ must not be moved after a
write to ρ;
• Read-After-Write: a write to ρ must not be moved after a read
from ρ;
• Write-After-Write: a write to ρ must not be moved after another
write to ρ.
We do not detail the implementation of list scheduling, which can
be found in compiler textbooks (Appel 1998; Muchnick 1997).
One important feature of this transformation is that it is performed
at the level of basic blocks: instructions are reordered within
basic blocks, but never moved across branch instructions nor
across labels. Therefore, the control-ﬂow graph of the original and
scheduled codes are isomorphic, and translation validation for list
scheduling can be performed by comparing matching blocks in the
original and scheduled codes.
In the remainder of the paper we will use the term “block” to
denote the longest sequence of non-branching instructions between
two branching instructions. The branching instructions in Mach are
label, goto, cond and call. This is a change from the common
view where a block includes its terminating branching instruction.
4.1 Symbolic expressions
As outlined in section 2.2, we will use symbolic execution to check
that the scheduling of a Mach block preserves its semantics. The
syntax of symbolic expressions that we use is as follows:
Resources:
ρ ::= r| Mem| Frame
V alue expressions:
t ::= r0 initial value of register r
| Getstack(τ, δ, tf )
| Getparam(τ, δ)
| Op(op, ⃗t)
| Load(chunk , mode, ⃗t, tm)
Memory expressions:
tm ::= Mem0 initial memory store
| Store(chunk , mode, ⃗t, tm, t)
Frame expressions:
tf ::= Frame0 initial frame
| Setstack(t, τ, δ, tf )
Symbolic code:
m ::= ρ↦→ (t| tm| tf )
Constraints:
s ::={t, tm, tf , . . .}
The resources we track are the processor registers (tracked indi-
vidually), the memory state (tracked as a whole), and the frame for
the current function (the part of its activation record that is treated
as separate from the memory by the Mach semantics). The sym-
bolic code m obtained by symbolic evaluation is represented as a
map from resources to symbolic expressions t, tf and tm of the
appropriate kind. Additionally, as explained in section 2.2, we also
collect a set s of symbolic expressions that have well-deﬁned se-
mantics.
We now give a denotational semantics to symbolic codes, as
transformers over concrete states (R, F, M). We deﬁne inductively
the following four predicates:
Σ ⊣ [ [t] ](R, F, M) = v V alue expressions
Σ ⊣ [ [tf ] ](R, F, M) = F ′ Frame expressions
Σ ⊣ [ [tm] ](R, F, M) = M ′ Memory expressions
Σ ⊣ [ [m] ](R, F, M) = ( R′, F ′, M ′) Symbolic codes
The deﬁnition of these predicates is straightforward. We show two
selected rules.
v = eval op(op, ⃗ v) Σ ⊣ [ [⃗t] ](R, F, M) = ⃗ v
Σ⊣ [ [op(op, ⃗t)] ](R, F, M) = v
∀r, Σ⊣ [ [m(r)] ](R, F, M) = R′(r)
Σ⊣ [ [m(Frame)] ](R, F, M) = F ′
Σ⊣ [ [m(Mem)] ](R, F, M) = M ′
Σ⊣ [ [m] ](R, F, M) = ( R′, F ′, M ′)
For constraints, we say that a symbolic expression t viewed
as the constraint “ t has well-deﬁned semantics” is satisﬁed in a
concrete state (R, F, M), and we write Σ, (R, F, M)|= t, if there
exists a value v such that Σ⊣ [ [t] ](R, F, M) = v, and similarly
for symbolic expressions tf and tm over frames and memory. For a
set of constraints s, we write Σ, (R, F, M)|= s if every constraint
in s is satisﬁed in state (R, F, M).
4.2 Algorithm for symbolic evaluation
We now give the algorithm that, given a list ⃗ ı of non-
branching Mach instructions, computes its symbolic evaluation
α(⃗ ı) = ( m, s).
We ﬁrst deﬁne the symbolic evaluation α(i, (m, s)) of one
instruction i as a transformer from the pair (m, s) of symbolic
code and constraint “before” the execution of i to the pair (m′, s′)
“after” the execution of i.
update(ρ, t, (m, s))
= ( m{ρ← t}, s∪{ t})
α(setstack(r, τ, δ), (m, s))
= update(Frame, Setstack(m(r), τ, δ, m(Frame)), (m, s))
α(getstack(τ, δ, r), (m, s))
= update(r, Getstack(τ, δ, m(Frame)), (m, s))
α(getparam(τ, δ, r), (m, s))
= update(r, Getparam(τ, δ), (m, s))
α(op(op, ⃗ r, r), (m, s))
= update(r, Op(op, m(⃗ r)), (m, s))
α(load(chunk , mode, ⃗ r, r), (m, s))
= update(r, Load(chunk , mode, m(⃗ r), m(Mem)), (m, s))
α(store(chunk , mode, ⃗ r, r), (m, s))
= update(Mem, Store(chunk , mode, m(⃗ r), m(Mem), m(r)), (m, s))
We then deﬁne the symbolic evaluation of the block b = i1; . . . ; in
by iterating the one-instruction symbolic evaluation function α,
starting with the initial symbolic code ε = (ρ↦→ ρ0) and the empty
set of constraints.
α(b) = α(in, . . . α(i2, α(i1, (ε,∅))) . . .)
Note that all operations performed by the block are recorded in the
constraint set s. It is possible to omit operations that cannot fail at
run-time (such as “load constant” operators) from s; we elected not
to do so for simplicity.
The symbolic evaluation algorithm has the following two prop-
erties that are used later in the proof of correctness for the validator.
First, any concrete execution of a block b satisﬁes its symbolic ex-
ecution α(b), in the following sense.
=== page 5 ===
Lemma 1. Let b be a block and c an instruction list starting with
a branching instruction. If Σ⊣ (b; c), R, F, M
∗
→ c, R′, F ′, M ′
and α(b) = ( m, s), then Σ⊣ [ [m] ](R, F, M) = ( R′, F ′, M ′) and
Σ, (R, F, M)|= s.
Second, if an initial state R, F, M satisﬁes the constraint part of
α(b), it is possible to execute b to completion from this initial state.
Lemma 2. Let b be a block and c an instruction list starting with a
branching instruction. Let α(b) = ( m, s). If Σ, (R, F, M)|= s,
then there exists R′, F ′, M ′ such that Σ ⊣ (b; c), R, F, M
∗
→
c, R′, F ′, M ′.
4.3 Validation at the level of blocks
Based on the symbolic evaluation algorithm above, we now deﬁne
a validator for transformations over blocks. This is a function Vb
taking two blocks (lists of non-branching instructions) b1, b2 and
returning true if b2 is a correct scheduling of b1.
Vb(b1, b2) =
let (m1, s1) = α(b1)
let (m2, s2) = α(b2)
return m2 = m1∧ s2⊆ s1
The correctness of this validator follows from the properties of
symbolic evaluation.
Lemma 3. Let b1, b2 be two blocks and c1, c2 two instruction
sequences starting with branching instructions. If Vb(b1, b2) =
true and Σ ⊣ (b1; c1), R, F, M
∗
→ c1, R′, F ′, M ′, then Σ ⊣
(b2; c2), R, F, M
∗
→ c2, R′, F ′, M ′.
Proof. Let (m1, s1) = α(b1) and (m2, s2) = α(b2). By hypoth-
esis Vb(b1, b2) = true, we have m2 = m1 and s2 ⊆ s1. By
Lemma 1, the hypothesis Σ⊣ (b1; c1), R, F, M
∗
→ c1, R′, F ′, M ′
implies that Σ, (R, F, M) |= s1. Since s2 ⊆ s1, it follows
that Σ, (R, F, M) |= s2. Therefore, by Lemma 2, there exists
R′′, F ′′, M ′′ such that Σ⊣ (b2; c2), R, F, M
∗
→ c2, R′′, F ′′, M ′′.
Applying Lemma 1 to the evaluations of (b1; c1) and (b2; c2),
we obtain that Σ ⊣ [ [m1] ](R, F, M) = ( R′, F ′, M ′) and
Σ⊣ [ [m2] ](R, F, M) = ( R′′, F ′′, M ′′). Since m2 = m1 and the
denotation of a symbolic code is unique if it exists, it follows that
(R′′, F ′′, M ′′) = ( R′, F ′, M ′). The expected result follows.
4.4 Validation at the level of function bodies
Given two lists of instructions c1 and c2 corresponding to the
body of a function before and after instruction scheduling, the
following validator V checks that Vb(b1, b2) = true for each pair
of matching blocks b1, b2, and that matching branching instructions
are equal. (We require, without signiﬁcant loss of generality, that
the external implementation of list scheduling preserves the order
of basic blocks within the function code.)
V (c1, c2) =
if c1 and c2 are empty:
return true
if c1 and c2 start with a branching instruction:
decompose c1 as i1 :: c′
1
decompose c2 as i2 :: c′
2
return i1 = i2∧ V (c′
1, c′
2)
if c1 and c2 start with a non-branching instruction:
decompose c1 as b1; c′
1
decompose c2 as b2; c′
2
(where b1, b2 are maximal blocks)
return Vb(b1, b2)∧ V (c′
1, c′
2)
otherwise:
return false
To prove that V (c1, c2) = true implies a semantic preserva-
tion result between c1 and c2, the natural approach is to reason
by induction on an execution derivation for c1. However, such an
induction decomposes the execution of c1 into executions of in-
dividual instructions; this is a poor match for the structure of the
validation function V , which decomposes c1 into maximal blocks
joined by branching instructions. To bridge this gap, we deﬁne an
alternate, block-oriented operational semantics for Mach that de-
scribes executions as sequences of sub-executions of blocks and of
branching instructions. Writing Σ for global contexts and S, S′ for
quadruples (c, R, F, M), the block-oriented semantics reﬁnes the
Σ⊣ S → S′, Σ⊣ S
∗
→ S′ and G⊣ f , P, R, M ⇒ R′, M ′
predicates of the original semantics into the following 5 predicates:
Σ ⊣ S→nb S′ one non-branching instruction
Σ ⊣ S
∗
→nb S′ several non-branching instructions
Σ ⊣ S→b S′ one branching instruction
Σ ⊣ S ; S′ block-branch-block sequences
G ⊣ f , P, R, M⇒blocks R′, M ′
The fourth predicate, written ;, represents sequences of
∗
→nb
transitions separated by→b transitions:
Σ⊣ S
∗
→nb S′
Σ⊣ S ; S′
Σ⊣ S
∗
→nb S1 Σ⊣ S1→b S2 Σ⊣ S2 ; S′
Σ⊣ S ; S′
It is easy to show that the ; block-oriented semantics is equiva-
lent to the original
∗
→ semantics for executions of whole functions.
Lemma 4. G ⊣ f , P, R, M ⇒ R′, M ′ if and only if G ⊣
f , P, R, M⇒blocks R′, M ′.
We are now in a position to state and prove the correctness of the
validator V . Let p be a program and p′ the corresponding program
after list scheduling and validation: p′ is identical to p except for
function bodies, and V (p(id ).code, p′(id ).code) = true for all
function names id∈ p.
Theorem 2. Let G and G′ be the global environments associated
with p and p′, respectively. If G ⊣ f , P, R, M ⇒ R′, M ′ and
V (f .code, f ′.code) = true, then G′⊣ f ′, P, R, M⇒ R′, M ′.
Proof. We show the analogous result using ⇒blocks instead of⇒
in the premise and conclusion by induction over the evaluation
derivation, using Lemma 3 to deal with execution of blocks. We
conclude by Lemma 4.
5. Validation of trace scheduling
Trace scheduling (Ellis 1986) is a generalization of list scheduling
where instructions are allowed to move past a branch or before a
join point, as long as this branch or joint point does not correspond
to a back-edge. In this work we restrict the instructions that can be
moved to non-branching instructions, thus considering a slightly
weaker version of trace scheduling than the classical one.
Moving instructions to different basic blocks requires compen-
sating code to be inserted in the control-ﬂow graph, as depicted in
ﬁgure 1. Consider an instruction i that is moved after a conditional
instruction targeting a label l in case the condition is true (left).
Then, in order to preserve the semantics, we must ensure that if the
condition is true during execution the instruction i is executed. We
insert a “stub”, i.e. we hijack the control by making the conditional
point to a new label l′ where the instruction i is executed before
going back to the label l.
=== page 6 ===
i
i
i
1
2 3
1
2
3
4
i
1
2 3
4
i
1
2 3
4
i
Figure 1. The two extra rules of trace scheduling. On the left, an example of move after a condition. On the right, an example of move before
a join point. On each example the code is shown before and after hijacking.
Dually, consider an instruction i that is moved before a label l
targeted by some instruction goto (l) (right part of ﬁgure 1). To
ensure semantics preservation, we must hijack the control of the
goto into a new stub that contains the instruction i. This way, i is
executed even if we enter the trace by following the goto.
In list scheduling, the extent of code modiﬁcations was limited:
an instruction can only move within the basic block that contains it.
The “unit” of modiﬁcation was therefore the block, i.e. the longest
sequences of non-branching instructions between branches. Dur-
ing validation, the branches can then be used as “synchronization
points” at which we check that the semantics are preserved. What
are the synchronization points for trace scheduling? The only in-
structions that limit code movement are the return instructions and
the target of back-edges, i.e. in our setting, a subset of the labels.
We also ﬁx the convention thatcall instructions cannot be crossed.
Those instructions are our synchronization points. In conclusion,
the unit of modiﬁcation for trace scheduling is the longest sequence
of instructions between these synchronization points.
As in the case of list scheduling, we would like to build the
validator in two steps: ﬁrst, build a function that validates pairs
of traces that are expected to match; then, extend it to a validator
for whole function bodies. The problem is that a trace can con-
tain branching instructions. Our previous block validator does not
handle this. Moreover, we must ensure that control ﬂows the same
way in the two programs, which was obvious for the block valida-
tor since states were equivalent before branching instructions, but
is no longer true for trace scheduling because of the insertion of
compensating code along some control edges.
A solution to these problems is to consider another represen-
tation of the program where traces can be manipulated as easily as
blocks were in the list of instructions representation. This represen-
tation is a graph of trees, each tree being a compact representation
of all the traces eligible for scheduling that begin at cut points in
the control-ﬂow graph. The cut points of interest, in our setting, are
c1 c2
g1 g2
trace scheduling
(not veriﬁed)
conversion
(section 5.4)
conversion
(section 5.4)
validation Vg
(section 5.3)
code as
lists of
instr.
code as
graphs
of trees
Figure 2. Overview of trace scheduling and its validation. Solid
arrows represent code transformations and validations. Dashed ar-
rows represent proofs of semantic preservation.
function entry points, calls, returns, and the labels that are targets
of back-edges. The important property of these trees is that if an
instruction has been moved then it must be within the boundaries
of a tree.
The validator for trace scheduling is built using this program
representation. To complete the validator we must transform our
program given as a list of instructions into a semantically equiv-
alent control-ﬂow graph of trees. The transformation to this new
representation also requires some code annotation. This leads to the
architecture depicted in ﬁgure 2 that we will detail in the remainder
of this section. Note that the transformation from lists of instruc-
tions to graphs of trees needs to be proved semantics-preserving in
both directions: if the list c is transformed to graph g, it must be the
case that g executes from state S to state S′ if and only if c executes
from S to S′.
5.1 A tree-based representation of control and its semantics
Figure 3 illustrates our tree-based representation of the code of a
function. In this section, we formally deﬁne its syntax and seman-
tics.
Syntax The code of a function is represented as a mapping from
labels to trees. Each label corresponds to a cut point in the control-
ﬂow graph of the function. A node of a tree is labeled either by a
non-branching instruction, with one child representing its unique
successor; or by a conditional instruction, with two childs for its
two successors. The leaves of instruction trees are out(l) nodes,
carrying the label l of the tree to which control is transferred.
Finally, special one-element trees are introduced to represent call
and return instructions.
Instruction trees:
T ::= seq(i, T ) (i a non-branching instruction)
| cond(cond, ⃗ r, T1, T2)
| out(l)
Call trees:
Tc ::= call((r| id ), l)
Return trees:
Tr ::= return
Control-ﬂow graphs:
g ::= l↦→ (T| Tc| Tr)
Functions:
f ::= fun id
{ stack n1; frame n2; entry l; code g;}
Semantics The operational semantics of the tree-based represen-
tation is a combination of small-step and big-step styles. We de-
scribe executions of instruction trees using a big-step semantics
=== page 7 ===
label l0
op1
cond . . . , l1
label l2
op2
cond . . . , l2
label l1
op3
label l4
ret
l0 ↦→ seq(op1, cond(. . . ,seq(op3, out(l4)),
out(l2)))
l2 ↦→ seq(op2, cond(. . . ,seq(op3, out(l4)),
out(l2)))
l4 ↦→ return
Figure 3. A code represented as a list of instructions (left) and as a graph of instruction trees (right)
Σ⊣ T, R, F, M ⇒ l, R′, F ′, M ′, meaning that the tree T , start-
ing in state (R, F, M), terminates on a branch to label l in state
(R′, F ′, M ′). Since the execution of a tree cannot loop inﬁnitely,
this choice of semantics is adequate, and moreover is a good match
for the validation algorithm operating at the level of trees that we
develop next.
Σ⊣ out(l), R, F, M⇒ l, R, F, M
v = eval op(op, R(⃗ r))
Σ⊣ T, R{rd← v}, F, M⇒ l, R′, F ′, M ′
Σ⊣ seq(op(op, ⃗ r, r), T ), R, F, M⇒ l, R′, F ′, M ′
true = eval condition(cond, R(⃗ r))
Σ⊣ T1, R, F, M⇒ l′, R′, F ′, M ′
Σ⊣ cond(cond, ⃗ r, T1, T2), R, F, M⇒ l′, R′, F ′, M ′
The predicate Σ ⊣ l, R, F, M
∗
→ l′, R′, F ′, M ′, deﬁned in
small-step style, expresses the chained evaluation of zero, one or
several trees, starting at label l and ending at label l′.
Σ⊣ l, R, F, M
∗
→ l, R, F, M
Σ⊣ f .graph(l), R, F, M⇒ l′, R′, F ′, M ′
Σ⊣ l′, R′, F ′, M ′ ∗
→ l′′, R′′, F ′′, M ′′
Σ⊣ l, R, F, M
∗
→ l′′, R′′, F ′′, M ′′
Finally, the predicate for evaluation of function calls, G ⊣
f , P, R, M ⇒ v, R′, M ′, is re-deﬁned in terms of trees in the
obvious manner.
alloc(M, 0, f .stack) = ( sp, M1)
init frame(f .frame) = F1 f .graph = g
G, f, sp, P⊣ g(f .entry), R, M1
∗
→ l, R′, M2
g(l) = return M ′ = free(M2, sp)
G⊣ f , P, R, M⇒ R′, M ′
5.2 Validation at the level of trees
We ﬁrst deﬁne a validator Vt that checks semantic preservation
between two instruction trees T1, T2.
Vt(T1, T2, (m1, s1), (m2, s2)) =
if T1 = seq(i1, T ′
1):
return Vt(T ′
1, T2, α(i1, (m1, s1)), (m2, s2))
if T2 = seq(i2, T ′
2):
return Vt(T1, T ′
2, (m1, s1), α(i2, (m2, s2))
if T1 = cond(cond1, ⃗ r1, T ′
1, T ′′
1 )
and T2 = cond(cond2, ⃗ r2, T ′
2, T ′′
2 ):
return cond1 = cond2∧ m1(⃗ r1) = m2(⃗ r2)
∧ Vt(T ′
1, T ′
2, (m1, s1), (m2, s2))
∧ Vt(T ′′
1 , T ′′
2 , (m1, s1), (m2, s2))
if T1 = out(l1) and T2 = out(l2):
return l2 = l1∧ m2 = m1∧ s2⊆ s1
in all other cases:
return false
The validator traverses the two trees in parallel, performing
symbolic evaluation of the non-branching instructions. We reuse
the α(i, (m, s)) function of section 4.2. The (m1, s1) and (m2, s2)
parameters are the current states of symbolic evaluation for T1 and
T2, respectively. We process non-branching instructions repeatedly
in T1 or T2 until we reach either two cond nodes or two out
leaves. When we reach cond nodes in both trees, we check that
the conditions being tested and the symbolic evaluations of their
arguments are identical, so that at run-time control will ﬂow on
the same side of the conditional in both codes. We then continue
validation on the true subtrees and on the false subtrees. Finally,
when two out leaves are reached, we check that they branch to
the same label and that the symbolic states agree ( m2 = m1 and
s2⊆ s1), as in the case of block veriﬁcation.
As expected, a successful run of Vt entails a semantic preserva-
tion result.
Lemma 5. if Vt(T1, T2) = true and Σ ⊣ T1, R, F, M ⇒
l, R′, F ′, M ′ then Σ⊣ T2, R, F, M⇒ l, R′, F ′, M ′
5.3 Validation at the level of function bodies
We now extend the tree validatorVt to a validator that operates over
two control-ﬂow graphs of trees. We simply check that identically-
labeled regular trees in both graphs are equivalent according to Vt,
and that call trees and return trees are identical in both graphs.
Vg(g1, g2) =
if Dom(g1)⁄= Dom(g2), return false
for each l∈ Dom(g1):
if g1(l) and g2(l) are regular trees:
if Vt(g1(l), g2(l), (ε,∅), (ε,∅)) = false, return false
otherwise:
if g1(l)⁄= g2(l), return false
end for each
return true
This validator is correct in the following sense. Let p,
p′ be two programs in the tree-based representation such
that p′ is identical to p except for the function bodies, and
Vg(p(id ).graph, p′(id ).graph) = true for all function names
id∈ p.
Theorem 3. Let G and G′ be the global environments associ-
ated with p and p′, respectively. If G ⊣ f , P, R, M ⇒ R′, M ′
=== page 8 ===
and Vg(f .graph, f ′.graph) = true, then G′⊣ f ′, P, R, M⇒
R′, M ′.
5.4 Conversion to the graph-of-trees representation
The validator developed in section 5.3 operates over functions
whose code is represented as graphs of instruction trees. How-
ever, the unveriﬁed trace scheduler, as well as the surrounding com-
piler passes, consume and produce Mach code represented as lists
of instructions. Therefore, before invoking the validator Vg, we
need to convert the original and scheduled codes from the list-of-
instructions representation to the graph-of-trees representation. To
prove the correctness of this algorithm, we need to show that the
conversion preserves semantics in both directions, or in other terms
that each pair of a list of instructions and a graph of trees is seman-
tically equivalent.
The conversion algorithm is conceptually simple, but not en-
tirely trivial. In particular, it involves the computation of back edges
in order to determine the cut points. Instead of writing the conver-
sion algorithm in Coq and proving directly its correctness, we chose
to use the translation validation approach one more time. In other
terms, the conversion from lists of instructions to graphs of trees
is written in unveriﬁed Caml, and complemented with a validator,
written and proved in Coq, which takes a Mach function f (with its
code represented as a list of instructions) and a graph of trees g and
checks that f .code and g are semantically equivalent. This check
is written f .code∼ g. The full validator for trace scheduling is
therefore of the following form:
V (f1, f2) =
convert f1.code to a graph of trees g1
convert f2.code to a graph of trees g2
return f1.code∼ g1∧ f2.code∼ g2∧ Vg(g1, g2)
To check that an instruction sequence C and a graph g are
equivalent, written C ∼ g, we enumerate the cut points l ∈
Dom(g) and check that the list c of instructions starting at point l
in the instruction sequence C corresponds to the tree g(l). We write
this check as a predicate C,B⊣ c∼ T , whereB = Dom( g) is
the set of cut points. The intuition behind this check is that every
possible execution path in c should correspond to a path in T that
executes the same instructions. In particular, if c starts with a non-
branching instruction, we have
i non-branching C,B⊣ c∼ T
C,B⊣ i :: c∼ seq(i, T )
Unconditional and conditional branches appearing in c need
special handling. If the target l of the branch is a cut point ( l∈B ),
this branch terminates the current trace and enters a new trace; it
must therefore corresponds to an out(l) tree.
l∈B
C,B⊣ label(l) :: c∼ out(l)
l∈B
C,B⊣ goto(l) :: c∼ out(l)
ltrue∈B C,B⊣ c∼ T
C,B⊣ cond(cond, ⃗ r, ltrue ) :: c∼ cond(cond, ⃗ r,out(ltrue ), T )
However, if l is not a cut point ( l /∈B ), the branch or label in c
is not materialized in the tree T and is just skipped.
l /∈B C,B⊣ c∼ T
C,B⊣ label(l) :: c∼ T
l /∈B c′ = find label(l, C) C,B⊣ c′∼ T
C,B⊣ goto(l) :: c∼ T
ltrue /∈B c′ = find label(ltrue , C)
C,B⊣ c∼ T C, B⊣ c′∼ T ′
C,B⊣ cond(cond, ⃗ r, ltrue ) :: c∼ cond(cond, ⃗ r, T′, T )
An interesting fact is that the predicate C,B⊣ c∼ T indirectly
checks thatB contains at least all the targets of back-edges in the
code C. For if this were not the case, the code C would contain
a loop that does not go through any cut point, and we would have
to apply one of the three “skip” rules above an inﬁnite number of
times; therefore, the inductive predicate C,B ⊣ c ∼ T cannot
hold. As discussed in section 6, the implementation of the ∼ check
(shown in appendix A) uses a counter of instructions traversed to
abort validation instead of diverging in the case whereB incorrectly
fails to account for all back-edges.
The equivalence check C∼ g deﬁned above enjoys the desired
semantic equivalence property:
Lemma 6. Let p be a Mach program and p′ a corresponding
program where function bodies are represented as graphs of trees.
Assume that p(id ).code ∼ p′(id ).code for all function names
id ∈ p. Let G and G′ be the global environments associated
with p and p′, respectively. If f .code ∼ f ′.code, then G ⊣
f , P, R, M⇒ R′, M ′ in the original Mach semantics if and only
if G′ ⊣ f ′, P, R, M ⇒ R′, M ′ in the tree-based semantics of
section 5.1.
The combination of Theorem 3 and Lemma 6 establishes the
correctness of the validator for trace scheduling.
6. The Coq mechanization
The algorithms presented in this paper have been formalized in
their entirety and proved correct using the Coq proof assistant ver-
sion 8.1. The Coq mechanization is mostly straightforward. Oper-
ational semantics are expressed as inductive predicates following
closely the inference rules shown in this paper. The main difﬁculty
was to express the algorithms as computable functions within Coq.
Generally speaking, there are two ways to specify an algorithm in
Coq: either as inductive predicates using inference rules, or as com-
putable functions deﬁned by recursion and pattern-matching over
tree-shaped data structures. We chose the second presentation be-
cause it enables the automatic generation of executable Caml code
from the speciﬁcations; this Caml code can then be linked with the
hand-written Caml implementations of the unveriﬁed transforma-
tions.
However, Coq is a logic of total functions, so the function
deﬁnitions must be written in a so-called “structurally recursive”
style where termination is obvious. All our validation functions
are naturally structurally recursive, except validation between trees
(function Vt in section 5.2) and validation of list-to-tree conversion
(the function corresponding to the∼ predicate in section 5.4).
For validation between trees, we used well-founded recursion,
using the sum of the heights of the two trees as the decreasing,
positive measure. Coq 8.1 provides good support for this style of
recursive function deﬁnitions (the Function mechanism (Barthe
et al. 2006)) and for the corresponding inductive proof principles
(the functional induction tactic).
V alidation of list-to-tree conversion could fail to terminate if the
original, list-based code contains a loop that does not cross any cut
point. This indicates a bug in the external converter, since normally
cut points include all targets of back edges. To detect this situation
and to make the recursive deﬁnition of the validator acceptable to
=== page 9 ===
Coq, we add a counter as parameter to the validation function,
initialized to the number of instructions in the original code and
decremented every time we examine an instruction. If this counter
drops to zero, validation stops on error. Appendix A shows the
corresponding validation algorithm.
The Coq development accounts for approximatively 11000 lines
of code. It took one person-year to design the validators, program
them and prove their correctness. Figure 5 is a detailed line count
showing, for each component of the validators, the size of the
speciﬁcations ( i.e. the algorithms and the semantics) and the size
of the proofs.
Speciﬁ- Proofs Total
cations
Symbolic evaluation 736 1079 1815
Block validation 348 1053 1401
Block semantics 190 150 340
Block scheduling validation 264 590 854
Trace validation 234 1045 1279
Tree semantics 986 2418 3404
Trace scheduling validation 285 352 637
Label manipulation 306 458 764
Typing 114 149 263
Total 3463 7294 10757
Figure 5. Size of the development (in non-blank lines of code,
without comments)
It is interesting to note that the validation of trace scheduling
is no larger and no more difﬁcult than that of list scheduling. This
is largely due to the use of the graph-of-trees representation of the
code. However, the part labeled “tree semantics”, which includes
the deﬁnition and semantics of trees plus the validation of the
conversion from list-of-instructions to graph-of-trees, is the largest
and most difﬁcult part of this development.
7. Preliminary experimental evaluation and
algorithmic issues
Executable validators were extracted automatically from the Coq
formalization of the algorithms presented in this paper and con-
nected to two implementations of scheduling optimizations writ-
ten in Caml: one for basic-block scheduling using the standard list
scheduling algorithm, the other for trace scheduling. The two veri-
ﬁed compilation passes thus obtained were integrated in the Com-
pcert experimental compiler (Leroy 2006; Leroy et al. 2003–2007),
and tested on the test suite of this compiler (a dozen Cminor pro-
grams in the 100-1000 l.o.c. range). This test suite is too small to
draw any deﬁnitive conclusion. We nonetheless include the exper-
imental results because they point out potential algorithmic inefﬁ-
ciencies in our approach.
All tests were successfully scheduled and validated after
scheduling. Manual inspection of the scheduled code reveals that
the schedulers performed a fair number of instruction reorderings
and, in the case of trace scheduling, insertion of stubs. V alidation
was effective from a compiler engineering viewpoint: not only
manual injection of errors in the schedulers were correctly caught,
but the validator also found one unintentional bug in our ﬁrst
implementation of trace scheduling.
To assess the compile-time overheads introduced by validation,
we measured the execution times of the two scheduling transfor-
mations and of the corresponding validators. Figure 4 presents the
results.
The tests were conducted on a Pentium 4 3.4 GHz Linux ma-
chine with 2 GB of RAM. Each pass was repeated as many times
as needed for the measured time to be above 1 second; the times
reported are averages.
On all tests except AES, the time spent in validation is com-
parable to that spent in the non-veriﬁed scheduling transformation.
The total time (transformation + validation) of instruction schedul-
ing is about 10% of the whole compilation time. The AES test (the
optimized reference implementation of the AES encryption algo-
rithm) demonstrates some inefﬁciencies in our implementation of
validation, which takes about 10 times longer than the correspond-
ing transformation, both for list scheduling and for trace schedul-
ing.
There are two potential sources of algorithmic inefﬁciencies
in the validation algorithms presented in this paper. The ﬁrst is
the comparison between the symbolic codes and constraint sets
generated by symbolic execution. Viewed as a tree, the symbolic
code for a block of length n can contain up to 2n nodes (consider
for instance the block r1 = r0 + r0; . . . ; rn = rn−1 + rn−1).
Viewed as a DAG, however, the symbolic code has size linear in
the length n of the block, and can be constructed in linear time.
However, the comparison function between symbolic codes that
we deﬁned in Coq compares symbolic codes as trees, ignoring
sharing, and can therefore take O(2n) time. Using a hash-consed
representation for symbolic expressions would lead to much better
performance: construction of the symbolic code would take time
O(n log n) (the log n accounts for the overhead of hash consing),
comparison between symbolic codes could be done in time O(1),
and inclusion between sets of constraints in time O(n log n). We
haven’t been able to implement this solution by lack of an existing
Coq library for hash-consed data structures, so we leave it for future
work.
The second source of algorithmic inefﬁciency is speciﬁc to
trace scheduling. The tree-based representation of code that we use
for validation can be exponentially larger than the original code
represented as a list of instructions, because of tail duplication of
basic blocks. This potential explosion caused by tail duplication
can be avoided by adding more cut points: not just targets of
back edges, but also some other labels chosen heuristically to
limit tail duplication. For instance, we can mark as cut points
all the labels that do not belong to the traces that the scheduler
chose to optimize. Such heuristic choices are performed entirely in
unveriﬁed code (the scheduler and the converter from list- to tree-
based code representations) and have no impact on the validators
and on their proofs of correctness.
8. Related work
The idea of translation validation appears in the work of Pnueli
et al. (1998a,b). It was initially conducted in the context of the
compilation of a synchronous language. The principle of the val-
idator is to generate veriﬁcation conditions that are solved by a
model checker. The authors mention the possibility of generating
a proof script during model checking, which generates additional
conﬁdence in the correctness of a run of validation, but is weaker
than a full formal veriﬁcation of the validator as in the present pa-
per.
The case of an optimizing compiler for a conventional, impera-
tive language has been addressed by Zuck et al. (2001, 2003) and
Barret et al. (2005). They use a generalization of the Floyd method
to generate veriﬁcation conditions that are sent to a theorem prover.
Two validators have been produced that implement this framework:
voc-64 (Zuck et al. 2003) for the SGI pro-64 compiler and TVOC
(Barret et al. 2005) for the ORC compiler. This work addresses ad-
vanced compiler transformations, including non-structure preserv-
ing transformations such as loop optimizations (Goldberg et al.
2005) and software pipelining (Leviathan and Pnueli 2006).
=== page 10 ===
Test program List scheduling Trace scheduling
Transformation V alidation Ratio V /T Transformation V alidation Ratio V /T
fib 0.29 ms 0.47 ms 1.60 0.44 ms 0.58 ms 1.32
integr 0.91 ms 0.87 ms 0.96 1.0 ms 1.2 ms 1.15
qsort 1.3 ms 1.5 ms 1.15 1.8 ms 3.3 ms 1.89
fft 9.1 ms 18 ms 1.98 19 ms 62 ms 3.26
sha1 9.4 ms 6.7 ms 0.71 12 ms 24 ms 2.00
aes 56 ms 550 ms 9.76 67 ms 830 ms 12.25
almabench 25 ms 16 ms 0.65 56 ms 200 ms 3.57
stopcopy 4.1 ms 4.1 ms 1.00 4.9 ms 6.1 ms 1.25
marksweep 5.3 ms 6.3 ms 1.18 6.8 ms 11 ms 1.69
Figure 4. Compilation times and veriﬁcation times
While the approach of Pnueli, Zuck et al. relies on veriﬁca-
tion condition generators and theorem proving, a different approach
based on abstract interpretation and static analysis was initiated by
Necula (2000). He developed a validator for the GCC 2.7 com-
piler, able to validate most of the optimisations implemented by
this compiler. His approach relies on symbolic execution of RTL
intermediate code and inspired the present work. Necula’s validator
addresses a wider range of optimizations than ours, requiring him
to compare symbolic executions modulo arithmetic and memory-
related equations.
Rival (2004) describes a translation validator for GCC 3.0 with-
out optimizations. While Necula’s validator handles only transfor-
mations over the RTL intermediate language, Rival’s relates di-
rectly the C source code with the generated PowerPC assembly
code. Rival’s validator uses Symbolic Transfer Functions to rep-
resent the behaviour of code fragments. While Necula and Rival
do not discuss instruction scheduling in detail, we believe that their
validators can easily handle list scheduling (reordering of instruc-
tions within basic blocks), but we do not know whether they can
cope with the changes in the control-ﬂow graph introduced by trace
scheduling.
Huang et al. (2006) describe a translation validator specialized
to the veriﬁcation of register allocation and spilling. Their algo-
rithm relies on data-ﬂow analyses: computation and correlation of
webs of def-use sequences. By specializing the validator to the
code transformations that a register allocator typically performs,
they claim to obtain a validator that is complete (no false alarms),
and they can also produce detailed explanations of errors.
Compared with validators based on veriﬁcation condition gen-
erators, validators based on static analysis like Necula’s, Rival’s,
Huang et al’s and ours are arguably less powerful but algorithmi-
cally more efﬁcient, making it realistic to perform validation at ev-
ery compilation run. Moreover, it seems easier to characterize the
classes of transformations that can be validated.
While several of the papers mentioned above come with on-
paper proofs, none has been mechanically veriﬁed. There are, how-
ever, several mechanized veriﬁcations of static analyzers, i.e. tools
that establish properties of one piece of compiled code instead of
relating two pieces of compiled code like translation validators do,
in particular the JVM bytecode veriﬁer (Klein and Nipkow 2003)
and data ﬂow analyzers (Cachera et al. 2005).
9. Conclusions and further work
We presented what we believe is the ﬁrst fully mechanized veriﬁ-
cation of translation validators. The two validators presented here
were developed with list scheduling and trace scheduling in mind,
but they seem applicable to a wider class of code transformations:
those that reorder, factor out or duplicate instructions within basic
blocks or instruction trees (respectively), without taking advantage
of non-aliasing information. For instance, this includes common
subexpression elimination, as well as rematerialization. We believe
(without any proof) that our validators are complete, that is, raise
no false alarms for this class of transformations.
It is interesting to note that the validation algorithms proceed
very differently from the code transformations that they validate.
The validators uses notions such as symbolic execution and block-
or tree-based decompositions of program executions that have ob-
vious semantic meanings. In contrast, the optimizations rely on
notions such as RAW/W AR/W AW dependencies and back-edges
whose semantic meaning is much less obvious. For this reason, we
believe (without experience to substantiate this claim) that it would
be signiﬁcantly more difﬁcult to prove directly the correctness of
list scheduling or trace scheduling.
A direct extension of the present work is to prove semantic
preservation not only for terminating executions, but also for di-
verging executions. The main reason why our proofs are restricted
to terminating evaluations is the use of big-step operational seman-
tics. A small-step (transition) semantics for Mach is in develop-
ment, and should enable us to extend the proofs of semantic preser-
vation to diverging executions. Another, more difﬁcult extension is
to take non-aliasing information into account in order to validate
reorderings between independent loads and stores.
More generally, there are many other optimizations for which
it would be interesting to formally verify the corresponding valida-
tion algorithms. Most challenging are the optimizations that move
computations across loop boundaries, such as loop invariant hoist-
ing and software pipelining.
Acknowledgments
Julien Forest helped us use the new Coq feature Function and
improved its implementation at our request. We thank Alain Frisch
for discussions and feedback.
References
Andrew W. Appel. Modern Compiler Implementation in ML . Cambridge
University Press, 1998.
Clark W. Barret, Yi Fang, Benjamin Goldberg, Ying Hu, Amir Pnueli, and
Lenore Zuck. TVOC: A translation validator for optimizing compilers.
In Computer Aided V eriﬁcation, 17th Int. Conf., CA V 2005, volume 3576
of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 291–295. Springer, 2005.
Gilles Barthe, Julien Forest, David Pichardie, and Vlad Rusu. Deﬁning and
reasoning about recursive functions: a practical tool for the Coq proof
assistant. In Functional and Logic Programming, 8th Int. Symp., FLOPS
2006, volume 3945 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages 114–
129. Springer, 2006.
Yves Bertot and Pierre Cast ´eran. Interactive Theorem Proving and Pro-
gram Development – Coq’Art: The Calculus of Inductive Constructions.
EA TCS Texts in Theoretical Computer Science. Springer, 2004.
=== page 11 ===
David Cachera, Thomas Jensen, David Pichardie, and Vlad Rusu. Extract-
ing a Data Flow Analyser in Constructive Logic. Theoretical Computer
Science, 342(1):56–78, 2005.
Coq development team. The Coq proof assistant. Software and documen-
tation available at http://coq.inria.fr/, 1989–2007.
Maulik A. Dave. Compiler veriﬁcation: a bibliography. SIGSOFT Softw.
Eng. Notes, 28(6):2–2, 2003.
John R. Ellis. Bulldog: a compiler for VLSI architectures . ACM Doctoral
Dissertation Awards. The MIT Press, 1986.
Benjamin Goldberg, Lenore Zuck, and Clark Barret. Into the loops: Prac-
tical issues in translation validation for optimizing compilers. In Proc.
Workshop Compiler Optimization Meets Compiler V eriﬁcation (COCV
2004), volume 132 of Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science,
pages 53–71. Elsevier, 2005.
Y uqiang Huang, Bruce R. Childers, and Mary Lou Soffa. Catching and
identifying bugs in register allocation. In Static Analysis, 13th Int. Symp.,
SAS 2006 , volume 4134 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science , pages
281–300. Springer, 2006.
Gerwin Klein and Tobias Nipkow. V eriﬁed bytecode veriﬁers. Theoretical
Computer Science, 298(3):583–626, 2003.
Gerwin Klein and Tobias Nipkow. A machine-checked model for a Java-
like language, virtual machine and compiler. ACM Transactions on
Programming Languages and Systems, 28(4):619–695, 2006.
D. Leinenbach, W. Paul, and E. Petrova. Towards the formal veriﬁcation
of a C0 compiler: Code generation and implementation correctness. In
Int. Conf. on Software Engineering and F ormal Methods (SEFM 2005) ,
pages 2–11. IEEE Computer Society Press, 2005.
Xavier Leroy. Formal certiﬁcation of a compiler back-end, or: programming
a compiler with a proof assistant. In 33rd symposium Principles of
Programming Languages, pages 42–54. ACM Press, 2006.
Xavier Leroy et al. The Compcert certiﬁed compiler back-end.
Development available at http://gallium.inria.fr/~xleroy/
compcert-backend/, 2003–2007.
Raya Leviathan and Amir Pnueli. V alidating software pipelining optimiza-
tions. In Int. Conf. On Compilers, Architecture, And Synthesis F or Em-
bedded Systems (CASES 2002) , pages 280–287. ACM Press, 2006.
Steven S. Muchnick. Advanced compiler design and implementation . Mor-
gan Kaufmann, 1997.
George C. Necula. Translation validation for an optimizing compiler. In
Programming Language Design and Implementation 2000 , pages 83–
95. ACM Press, 2000.
Amir Pnueli, Ofer Shtrichman, and Michael Siegel. The code validation tool
(CVT) – automatic veriﬁcation of a compilation process. International
Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer, 2:192–201, 1998a.
Amir Pnueli, Michael Siegel, and Eli Singerman. Translation validation. In
Tools and Algorithms for Construction and Analysis of Systems, TACAS
’98, volume 1384 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 151–166.
Springer, 1998b.
Xavier Rival. Symbolic transfer function-based approaches to certiﬁed
compilation. In 31st symposium Principles of Programming Languages,
pages 1–13. ACM Press, 2004.
Emin G ¨un Sirer and Brian N. Bershad. Testing Java virtual machines. In
Proc. Int. Conf. on Software Testing And Review , 1999.
Martin Strecker. Compiler veriﬁcation for C0. Technical report, Universit ´e
Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, April 2005.
L. Zuck, A. Pnueli, and R. Leviathan. V alidation of optimizing compilers.
Technical Report MCS01-12, Weizmann institute of Science, 2001.
Lenore Zuck, Amir Pnueli, Yi Fang, and Benjamin Goldberg. VOC: A
methodology for translation validation of optimizing compilers. Journal
of Universal Computer Science , 9(3):223–247, 2003.
A. Appendix: the validation algorithm for
conversion from instruction lists to instruction
trees
We show here the algorithm that determines semantic equivalence
between a list of instructions and an instruction tree, corresponding
to the predicate f ,B⊣ c∼ T in section 5.4.
let rec skip control B func c counter =
2 if counter = 0
then None
4 else
match c with
6 | Mlabel lbl :: c’ →
if lbl in B
8 then Some (Mlabel lbl :: c’)
else skip control B func c’ ( counter − 1)
10 | Mgoto lbl :: c’ →
match ﬁnd label lbl func with
12 | Some c’’→ if lbl in B
then Some (Mgoto lbl :: c’)
14 else skip control B func c’’ ( counter − 1)
| None → None
16 | i :: c’ → Some (i :: c’)
| → None
18
let test out sub lbl =
20 match sub with
| out lbl ’ → lbl = lbl ’
22 | → false
24 let rec validTreeBase B f cur t =
let cur’ = skip control B ( fn code f ) cur ( length ( fn code f )) in
26 match cur’, t with
| Some(getstack(i , t , m) :: l ), getstack ( i ’, t ’, m’,sub) →
28 i = i ’ ∧ t = t ’ ∧ m = m’ ∧
validTreeBase B f l sub
30 | Some(setstack( m,i, t ) :: l ), setstack ( m’,i ’, t ’, sub) →
i = i ’ ∧ t = t ’ ∧ m = m’ ∧
32 validTreeBase B f l sub
| Some(getparam(i,t , m) :: l ), getparam(i ’, t ’, m’,sub) →
34 i = i ’ ∧ t = t ’ ∧ m = m’ ∧
validTreeBase B f l sub
36 | Some(op(op,lr, m) :: l ), op(op’, lr ’, m’,sub) →
op = op’ ∧ lr = lr ’ ∧ m = m’ ∧
38 validTreeBase B f l sub
| Some(load(chk,addr, lr , m) :: l ), load( chk’, addr’, lr ’, m’,sub) →
40 addr = addr’ ∧ chk = chk’ ∧ lr = lr ’ ∧ m = m’ ∧
validTreeBase B f l sub
42 | Some(store(chk, addr, lr , m) :: l ), store ( chk’, addr’, lr ’, m’,sub) →
addr = addr’ ∧ chk = chk’ ∧ lr = lr ’ ∧ m = m’ ∧
44 validTreeBase B f l sub
| Some(cond(c,rl , lbl ) :: l ), cond(c’, rl ’, sub1, sub2) →
46 c = c’ ∧ lr = lr ’ ∧
validTreeBase B f l sub2 ∧
48 ( if lbl in B
then test out sub1 lbl
50 else match ﬁnd label lbl ( fn code f ) with
| Some l’ → validTreeBase B f l ’ sub1
52 | None → false )
| Some(label(lbl ) :: l ), out( lbl ’) → lbl = lbl ’
54 | Some(goto(lbl) :: l ), out( lbl ’) → lbl = lbl ’
| , → false
