ous environment representations such as those used bythe
ellashybrid strategies such
as those suggested b
in a uniform framework.
The second stageclosurerepresentationis a type-based
translation in which the implementation of closures is de-type-check the resulting programs because polymorphism
termined. The main idea is to representclosures as objects
(in contrast to the proposed representation ofobjects as clo-
suresollowing Pierce and Te consider
objects to be packages of existential type consisting of a sin-Section  we giveanoverview of closure conversion and
gle method (the code part of the closure) together with athe typing issues involved for the simply-typed-calculus.
single instance variable (the environment part) whose type
(the environment representation) is held abstract. This cap-transform for the simply-typed case. In Section  wegivean
tures the critical "privacy" propertyofenvironment repre-
sentations for closures. In the simply-typed case wemake
direct use of Pierce and Turner's model of objects. In the
polymorphic case wemust in addition exploit the notion of.
translucencymanifest typesype
of a polymorphic closure.
The correctness of both the abstract closure conversion
and the closure representation stages are proved using the
method of logical relations. The main idea is to define a
type-indexed family of simulation relations that establish a
correspondence between the source and target terms of the
translation. Once a suitable system of relations has been
defined it is relatively straightforward to proveby induction
on the definition of the compilation relation that the source
and target of the translation are related from whichwemay
conclude that a closed program and its compilation evaluate
to the same result. Due to a lack of space the proofs of
correctness are omitted here. However full details are given
in the companion tec
Closure conversion is discussed in descriptions of various
related toariables in
the bodies of-abstractions but differs by making the rep-
resentation of the environment explicit as a data structure.
Making the environment explicit is important because it ex-
poses environment construction and variable lookup to an
optimizer. Furthermore Shao and Appel show that not all
environment represen
thus choosing a good environment representation is an im-
portant part of compilation. Wand and Stecve
consider two optimizations of the basic closure conversion
strategy calledselectiveandlightweightclosure conversion
and provide a correctness proof for each of these in an un-
tand's work into a typed
setting and provides correctness proofs for Wand's opti-
mizations. Hannan's translation is given like ours as a de-
ductive system but like-lifting he does not consider the
important issue of environment representation (preferring an
abstract account) nor does he consider the typing proper-
ties of the closure-converted code. Finally neither Wand nor
Hannan consider closure conversion under a type-passing in-
terpretation of polymorphism.
Wehave put the ideas in this paper to practical use in
two separate compilers for ML: one compiler is being used
to study novel approaches to tag-free garbage collection and
the other compiler provides a general framework for analyz-
ing types at run time to determine the shapes of objects.
Propagating types through closure conversion is necessary
for both compilers so that types can be examined at run
time.Wehave also found that typed closure conversion
along with our other type-preserving translations made it
possible to find and eliminate compiler bugs since we can au-
tomatically type-check the output of each compiler phase.
Some compilers for ML based on representation analysis
ype information through closure
conversion.However their information is not enough to
is implemented by coercions and all polymorphic types are
represented byasingletype.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: In
In Section  we provide the details of our type-preserving
overview of closure conversion and the typing issues involved
for the predicative fragment of the polymorphic-calculus.
The formal development of this conversion is given in Section
Overview of SimplyTyped Closure Conversion
The main ideas of closure conversion may be illustrated by
considering the following ML program:
let val x =
val y =
val z =
val f =w. x  y  w
in
f
end
The functionfcontains free variablesxandybutnotz.
Wemay eliminate the references to these variables from the
body offby abstracting on an environmentenv and replac-
ingxandyby references to the environment. In compen-
sation a suitable environmentcontaining the bindings forx
andymust be passed tofbefore it is applied. This leads
to the following translation:
let val x =
val y =
val z =
val f = (env.w. (#x env)  (#y env)  w)
fx=x, y=yg
in
f
end
References toxandyin the body offare replaced by
projections (field selections)#xand#ythat access the corre-
sponding component of the environment. Since the code for
fis closed it may be hoisted out of the enclosing definition
and defined at the top-level. We ignore this "hoisting" phase
and instead concentrate on the process of closure conversion.
These simple translations fail to delay the application of
the code to its environment under call-by-value evaluation.
A natural representation of a delayed application or closure
is an ordered pair(code, env)consisting of the code to-
gether with its environment.Application of a closure to
an argument proceeds by projecting the code part from the
closure and applying it simultaneously to the environment
and the argument according to some calling convention. For
example:
let val x =
val y =
val z =
val code =env.w. #x(env)  #y(env)  w
val env =fx=x, y=yg
val f = (code, env)
in
(# f) (# f)
end
But sincecodehas a type of the formo!o!o where
ve
ois the type of the environmentenv the closure as a
ve
whole would havetype (o!o!o)Thetao showing
veve
the type of the environment explicitly.That violates the
"privacy" of the environment representation. As a result
using this translation on a well-typed source program will
not in general result in a well-typed target program. For
example consider the following ML source program with
typeint!int:
let val y =
in
if true then
x. xy
else
z. z
end
Performing the translation above yields:
let val y =
in
if true then
(env.x. x  #y(e),fy=yg)
else
(env.z. z,fg)
end
This program fails to type-check because thethen-arm of
theif-expression has type (fy:intg!int!int)Thetafy:intg
while theelse-arm has type (fg !int!int)Thetafg.
In order to preservetypes in the target language the
representation of the environmentmay be hidden using ex-
istential tes the typing rules for exis-
tentials. Apackoperation pairs a typeowith a valueeas
an existential holdingoabstract as a type variablet.An
openoperation takesapackageeand opens it binding the
abstract type totand the value of the package toxwithin
the scope ofe. The abstract typetis constrained so that
it cannot leave the scope of theopenconstruct hence the
restriction thattnot appear in the free type variables ofoe.
Usingpackwe can hide the type of the environment for
a closure value as follows:
packowith(code;env)ast:(t!o!o)Thetat:
veveveve
A closure of typeo!ois represented as a package of type
t:(t!o!o)Thetatwhere the type of the environment
veveve
(o) is held abstract ast.Under this translation the
veve
example abovewould be translated to:
let val y =
in
if true then
packfy:intgwith (env.x. x#y(env),fy=yg)
ast:(t!int!int)Thetat
veveve
else
packfgwith (env.z. z,fg)
ast:(t!int!int)Thetat
veveve
end
Since the types of the arms of theif-expression agree the
target code is well-typed with typet:(t!int!int)Theta
veve
t.
ve
An applicationee'is correspondingly translated to the
expression
open e astwith z :(t!o!o)Thetat
veveve
in
(# z) (# z) e'
end
whichopens the package extracts the code and environ-
ment and applies the code to the environment and the ar-
gument.
This representation of closures bears a striking resem-
blance to the model of objects suggested byPierceand
Type of the form
t:tThetao[ttis the type of the instance variable(s) and
o[type of the method(s). According to the forego-
ing account closures may be thought of as objects with one
instance variable (the environment) and one method (the
code).
AFormal Account of SimplyTyped Closure Conversion
In this section we present the details of closure conversion for
the call-by-value simply-typed-calculus. The conversion
is described in increasing detail by three stages: The first
stageabstract closureconversionconverts each function to
a closure but holds the representation of the closure abstract.
To simplify the presentation some freedom is allowed in the
construction of environments but no shared environments
are used. The second stageenvironment sharing adds more
structure to the translation thereby allowing environments
to be shared. The third stageclosurerepresentation makes
the representation of closures explicit through the use of
translucent sums. Each stage is defined as a type-directed
translation and the correctness of the translations is estab-
lished using logical relations.
The syntax of the source language is defined as follows:
Typeso::=bjo!o
Expressionse::=cjxjx:o: ejee
Valuesv::=cjx:o: e
Types (o) consist of base types (b) and function types (!).
Expressions (e) consist of constants (c) of base type vari-
ables abstractions and applications. WeuseGammatodenote
asequenceof type bindings of the formfx:o;:::;x:og
nn
(n) where thexare distinct. The judgementGamma'e:o
i
asserts that the expressionehas typeounder the type as-
signment Gamma and is derived from the standard typing rules of
the simply-typed-calculus. We define the dynamic seman-
tics of the language using a judgement of the forme,!v(e
evaluates tov). The judgement is derived from the following
standard inference rules for call-by-value evaluation:
e,!x:o:e e,!ve[v=x],!v
v,!v
ee,!v
The results of this paper easily extended to other source types
including products and sums.
Delta; Gamma'e:t:oe
Delta; Gamma'e:oe[o=t]
Delta]ftg;Gamma]fx:oeg'e:oe(tFTV(oe);tDelta)
Delta; Gamma'packowitheast:oe
Delta; Gamma'openeastwithxine:oe
Figure : Typing Rules for Existentials
.Abstract Closure Conversion
cl
The target language for abstract closure conversionis
defined as follows:
Typeso::=bjo!ojhoTheta:::Thetaoijcode(o;o;o)
nve
Exp'se::=cjxjeejhe;:::;eijss(e)j
ni
x:o:x:o:ejhhe;eii
veve
Valuesv::=cjx:o:x:o:ejhv;:::;vijhhv;vii
veven
In the introduction we informally presented closures as par-
tial applications. As noted we wish to delay this partial ap-
plication until the closure is applied to an argument so that
the code and environment remain separate and the code can
be shared among each instantiation of the closure. There-
fore in this account of closure conversion we representthe
delayed partial application as an abstract closure of the form
hhe; eiiwhereeis the code andeis the environment. This
veve
allows us to distinguish between delayed partial applications
(closures) and closure application (ee). Code expressions
x:o:x:o:e are a restricted form of closed-expressions
veve
that abstract both an environment(x) and an argument
ve
(x). The types of code expressions are also distinguished
from the types of closures and are written ascode(o;o;o)
ve
whereoo andoare the types of the environment the
ve
argument and the return value respectively.
cl
The typing rules forare standard except for code and
closures which are defined as follows:
fx:o;x:og'e:o
veve
Gamma'x:o:x:o:e:code(o;o;o)
veveve
Gamma'e:code(o;o;o)Gamma'e:o
veveve
Gamma'hhe; eii:o!o
ve
Since we require code to be closed in order that it maybe
hoisted to the top level onlyx:o(the environment) and
veve
x:o(the argument) can be assumed when typing the body
of the code.
Evaluation of closures and application proceeds as fol-
lows:
e,!ve,!v
hhe;eii,!hhv;vii
e,!hhx:o:x:o:e; viie,!ve[v=x;v=x],!v
veveveveve
ee,!v
We define abstract closure conversion as a type-directed
cl
translation from the source language toin Figure . The
translation is formulated as a deductive system with judge-
ments of the form Gamma;x:oe;eandGamma;x:oGamma;e
ve
where Gamma and Gammaare source type assignmentsois a source
typeeis a source expression andeandeare target
ve
expressions. The variablexis considered as the current ar-
gument while the other free variables in a source expressionstitutions (fl) mapping variables to their respectiveclassof
should be in Gamma and accessed through the currentenviron-
ment in the translation.The judgementGamma;x:oe;e
asserts thateis the translation ofeunder the assump-
tion that Gamma]fx:og'e:ofor someo. The judgement
Gamma;x:oGamma;easserts thateis an expression that eval-
veve
uates to the environment corresponding to Gammaunder the as-
sumption that each binding in Gammaoccurs in Gamma]fx:og. Note
that the order of bindings in Gamma is important and thus it is
considered to be a sequence and not a set.
In a translated expressionxis always used to hold the
ve
currentlocalenvironment.Consequently the translation
th
rule (env) maps a source variablexfound in theiposition
i
th
of type assignment Gamma to theiprojection of the environment
variablex while the rule (arg) translates the argument
ve
variablexto itself.
The translation of an abstraction produces a closure con-
sisting of code and an environment. To construct the envi-
ronment wechoose a type assignmentGammasuchthatGamma;x:o
Gamma;eis derivable via the (context) rule and Gamma;x:o
ve
e;e.Thesetwo constraints can be summarized bysaying
that every binding in Gammacan also be found in Gamma]fx:og.
In a more detailed formulation Gammawould be obtained from
Gamma]fx:ogvia the application ofstrengtheningandexchange
rules. Furthermore Gammais required to contain bindings for all
of the free variables in the original functionx:o: e.The
environment itself is constructed via the (context)rule by
translating eachofthevariables occurring in Gamma(namely
x;DeltaDeltaDelta;x) to the target expressionse;DeltaDeltaDelta;e. The result-
nn
ing expressions are placed in a tuple (he;:::;ei) to form
n
the environment data structure of the closure. The environ-
ment has typehoThetaDelta Delta DeltaThetaoiwhichwe summarize by writing
n
jGammaj.
To produce the code of the closure we translate the
body of the source function under the strengthened assump-
tions Gamma;x:o producing the body of the codee and then
we abstract the environment and argument resulting in
x:jGammaj:x:o: e.
ve
Using a dummy argument(x:b) to translate an entire
closed program it is easy to proveby induction on the
derivation of the translation that the translation preserves
the type of a program.
Theorem If;'e:oand;;x:be;ethen;'e:o.
Toprove the operational correctness of the translation
weuseatype-indexed family of logical relations relating
closed source expressions to closed target expressions ()
and closed source values to closed target values (ss). The
relations are defined by induction on source types as follows:
eeiffe,!vande,!vandvssv
oo
cssc
b
vssvifffor allvssvvvvv.
o!ooo
We extend the relation to finite source (fl) and target sub-
values. These relations are defined as follows:
flss[hv;:::;vi=x;v=x]
nve
fx:o;:::;x:og;x:o
nn
ifffl(x)ssvfor inandfl(x)ssv.
ioio
i
(const)Gamma;x:oc;c(arg)Gamma;x:ox;x
Gamma;x:oGamma;eGamma;x:oe;e
ve
(abs)
Gamma;x:ox:o:e;hhx:jGammaj:x:o: e;e
veve
Gamma;x:ox;e:::Gamma;x:ox;e
(context)
Gamma;x:ofx:o;:::;x:og;he;:::;ei
nn
Figure : Simply-Typed Abstract Closure Conversion
Theorem  (Operational Correctness)Letflssfl.
Gamma;x:o
IfGamma]fx:og'e:oandGamma;x:oe;e thenfl(e)
o
fl(e).
This theorem and the definition of the relations imply
that for a closed program with a base type the results of
evaluation of the original program and its translation are
the same.
.Sharing Environments
Some implementations of functional programming languages
use environments with nested structures that may share
some portions of the environment with other closures. Shar-
ing environments decreases the amount of space consumed
by a closure and decreases the time to construct the closure's
environment. However sharing can also require extra in-
structions to access a variable's binding in the environment.
Furthermore sharing environments naively can lead to space
problems in the presence of a standard tracing garbage col-
lector. In this section we extend our closure conversion to
allow for but not require shared environments. Wedosoby
adding extra structure to the typing contexts of the trans-
lation judgement and use this extra structure to guide the
vironments.Wethen
showhow the resulting translation subsumes a wide variety
of environment representations used in practice.
In the previous section translation judgements were of
the form Gamma;x:oe;ewhere Gamma was aflattype assign-
ment of the formfx:o;:::;x:og. Here we add extra
nn
structure to the translation judgementbyusingnestedtype
assignments defined as follows:
Theta::=fx:ogjhTheta;:::;Thetai
m
A nested type assignment is either a single type binding
or a sequence of nested type assignments.The environ-
ment corresponding to the type assignment Theta is represented
in the target language bytypejThetajwherejfx:ogj=oand
jhTheta;:::;Thetaij=hjThetajTheta:::ThetajThetaji. Clearlywe can obtain
mm
a non-nested type assignment (Gamma) from a nested type assign-
ment (Theta) simply by dropping the extra structure. Hence
we consider Theta to representanestedtype assignmentaswell
as its corresponding flat type assignment.
The relevant translation rules for closure conversion with
nested environments are given in Figure . The other trans-
lation rules are the same as in Figure  replacing Gamma with
Theta.
The (arg) rule translates a nested type assignmentcon-
sisting of only the current argumenttothevariable itself.
(env)fx:o;:::;x:og;x:ox;ss(x)
nniive
Gamma;x:oe;eGamma;x:oe;e
(app)
iiGamma;x:oee;ee
nn
(Gamma]fx:og'x:o)
ii
n
The (env) rule gives us the currentenvironment directly as
xallowing us to avoid creating a copy. This rule coupled
ve
with the (env-tuple) rule allows us to construct shared envi-
ronments as nested tuples. If we translate Theta toeunder the
type assignmentTheta then the (subenv) rule lets us translate
i
Thetatoe[ss(x)=xype assignmentwhich contains
iveve
th
Thetaas theicomponent. Variablexis translated as a nested
i
type assignmentfx:ogby(var).
Nested type assignments are flexible enough to repre-
sentvarious environment representations used in practice.
For example the Categorical Abstract Mac
uses linked lists to representenvironments. This is reflected
in our framework by restricting the shape of nested type as-
signments and by restricting the (env-tuple) rule to "cons"
the current argumentonto the currentenvironment:
(CAM context)Theta::=fx:ogjhfx:og;Thetai
cc
(env-tuple)Theta;x:ohx:o;Thetai;hx; xi
ccve
The advantage of the CAM strategy is that the cost of the
construction of a new environment is constant. However
in the worst case accessing values in the environmenttakes
time proportional to the length of the environment.
In contrast the Fvironments with no
sharing. The closure conversion of Figure  accurately mod-
els the environment strategy of the FAM if wechoose a spe-
cific strengthening strategy in the (abs) rule where only the
free variables of the function are preserved in the resulting
closure's environment. The advantage of the FAM environ-
ment representation is that the cost of variable lookup is
always constant and the representation is "safe for space"
wever constructing
the environment for a closure takes time proportional to the
number of free variables in the function and closures cannot
share portions of their environment.
Clearly there are a variety of other strategies for form-
ing environments.For example the shared closure strat-
egy described b
space can also be formulated in our framework. However
to determine a good representation for each closure's envi-
ronment requires a good deal more information including
an estimate as to howmany times eachvariable is accessed
when garbage collection can occur what garbage collection
algorithm is usedetc.
.Closure Representation
Abstract closure conversion chooses an environment repre-
sentation for each closure and makes the construction of clo-
sures explicit. However abstract closure conversion makes
(arg)fx:og;x:ofx:og;x(env)Theta;x:oTheta;x(var)
Theta;x:oTheta;e
i
(subenv)(env-tuple)
hTheta;:::;Thetai;x:oTheta;e[ss(x)=x]
niveve
Figure : Simply-Typed Closure Conversion using Nested Environments
the extraction of the code and environment in an application
implicit in the operational semantics. Ideally these extrac-
tion operations should be explicit so that an optimizer can
eliminate redundant projections. For instance if the same
closure is repeatedly applied to some arguments in a loop
we should be able to extract the code and environmentof
the closure one time name these values and then use these
names within the loop.
We therefore define a target languagewith existential
types as follows:
Typeso::=bjtjhoTheta:::Thetaoijcode(o;o;o)jt:o
nve
Exp'se::=cje(e;e)jx:o:x:o:ejhe;:::;eij
veven
ss(e)jpackowitheasoj
i
openeastwithx:oine
cl
This language is the same asexcept for the addition
of package values of typet:othat pair an abstract type (t)
with a value of typeo.Function types (!) are no longer
necessary because they can be represented using other type
constructors (namelyandcode(o;o;o)). In order to
ve
prevent the partial application of the code to its environ-
ment we restrict applications to the forme(e;e). The
typing rules and evaluation ofpackandopenexpressions
cl
We begin by defining a translation fromtotypes
denotedjojand defined as follows:
jbj=b
jhoTheta:::Thetaoij=hjojTheta:::Thetajoji
nn
jcode(o;o;o)j=code(joj;joj;joj)
veve
jo!oj=t:hcode(t;joj;joj)Thetati:
veveve
The translation of an arrowtype is a pair consisting of codeenvironment so that their representations remain private to
and an environment with the environmenttype (t) held
ve
abstract using an existential.
cl
The translation mappingterms toterms is sum-
marized in Figure . The translation defines judgements of
cl
the form Gammae:o;ewhere Gammaeandoare atype
assignment expression and type respectively andeis a
expression.The interesting rules are (closure)and (app).
cl
The other rules (not shown) simply map the othercon-
structs to theircounterparts. A closure is translated to a
pair of the code and the environmentpacked with the type
of the environment. The translation of an application ex-
tracts from a package the pair of a code and an environment
and applies the code to the environment and the argument.
It is easy prove that the translation preserves the type
of a program up to the translation of the type. Wedoso
by first extending the type translation to type assignments
writing:
jfx:o;:::;x:ogj=fx:joj;:::;x:jojg
nnnn
Theta;x:ofx:og;e
ve
Theta;x:ox;e
Theta;x:oTheta;eDeltaDeltaDeltaTheta;x:oTheta;e
nn
Theta;x:ohTheta;:::;Thetai;he;:::;ei
nn
Theorem IfGamma'e:oandGammae:o;e then;;jGammaj'
e:joj.
Operational correctness of the translation is proven using
clcl
logical relations betweenandexpressionsand
cl
values andandsubstitutions. The definition of
relations and the proof of the operational correctness are
found in the tec
Overview of Polymorphic Closure Conversion
Closure conversion for a language with ML-style (i.e.pred-
icativws a similar pattern
to the simply-typed case but with the additional complica-
tion that wemust account for free type variables as well
as free value variables in the code of an abstraction and
both value abstractions (-terms) and type abstractions (Lambda-
terms) induce the creation of closures. In this section we
giveanoverview of the typing difficulties encountered when
closure converting value abstractions. The treatmentoftype
abstractions is similar (see Section  for details).
To eliminate free occurrences of type variables and or-
dinary variables from the code we abstract with respect to
atype environment and a value environment replacing free
variables by references to the appropriate environment. By
abstracting both free type variables and free value variables
the code becomes closed and can be hoisted to the top level.
The abstracted code is then "partially applied" to suitable
representations of the type and value environments to form a
polymorphic closure. As in the simply-typed case we need a
data structure to representthedelayed partial application of
the code to its environments. Also we need to abstract both
thekindof the type environment and thetypeof the value
the closure. Without the abstraction weruninto the same
typing problems that we encountered with the simply-typed
case.
As a running example consider the expression:
x:t.(x:t,y:t, z:int)
of typet!(tThetatThetaint)wheretandtare free type
variables andyandzare free value variables of typetand
intrespectively. After closure conversion this expression is
translated to the partial application
let val code =
Lambdatenv ::ft::Omega,t::Omegag.
venv :fy:#ttenv, z:intg.
x:(#ttenv).(x, #y venv, #z venv)
in
codeft=t,t=tgfy=y, z=zg
end
Gammae:code(o;o;o);eGammae:o;e
ve
(closure)
Gammahhe; eii:o!o;packjojwithhe;eiasjo!oj
ve
Gammae:o!o;e
(app)Gammaee:o
openeastwithx:hcode(t;joj;joj)Thetatiin(ssx)(ssx; e)
veve
Figure : Important Rules of Simply-Typed Closure Representation
Thecodeabstracts type environment(tenv) and value en-
vironment(venv) arguments. The actual type environment
ft=t,t=tg is a constructor record with kindft::Omegat::Omegag
where Omega is the kind of monotypes. The actual value envi-
ronmentfy=y, z=zgis a record with typefy:t, z:intg.
However to keep the code closed so that it may be hoisted
all references to free type variables in the type ofvenvmust
come fromtenv.Thus we givevenvthe typefy:#ttenv,
z:intg. Similarly the code's argumentxis given the type
#ttenv. Consequentlythecodepart of the closure is ations are based on the idea oftranslucent sumsman-
closed expression of closed typeoewhere
oe=tenv::ft::Omega,t::Omegag.
fy:#ttenv, z:intg!
(#ttenv)!((#ttenv)Theta(#ttenv)Thetaint)
It is easy to check that the entire expression has type
t!(tThetatThetaint) and thus the type of the original function
is preserved.
Wemust now translate the partial application of thecode
to it environments into a data structure. The structure must
be "mixed-phased" because it needs to hold a type (the type
environment) as well as values (the code and value environ-
ment). A first attempt is to represent the data structure as
a packagee where
e= packft=t,t=tgwith (code,fy=y, z=zg)
ast::.oeThetao
teteve
andcodeis the code of the closure above and
=ft::Omega,t::Omegag
te
o=fy:#tt, z:intg
vete
It is easy to verify thateis well-typed under the typing rule
forpack.
Unfortunately there is a problem with this approach:
an application ofeto some argumente:tmustopenthe
package to extract the code type and value environments
prior to the call:
openeast::with z:oeThetao
teteve
in
(# z)t(# z)e
te
end
Although this is the "obvious" translation of application it
failstobewell-typed! The difficulty is thateis of typet
whereas the expression(# z)t(# z)has type:
te
(#tt)!((#tt)Theta(#tt)Thetaint).
tetete
Sincetis abstracttis not provably equivalentto#tt
tete
and this translation of application fails to typecheck.
veve
ve
ve
ve
Gammae:o;e
;(xDom(Gamma))
ve
The problem is that existentials provide a certain kind
of mixed-phase data structure where the type portionmust
be abstract. We can use this to hide representations but
here we need to know what the type environment actually
is in order to determine the type of the closure. In short
we need a mixed-phase data structure that does not hide its
type component.
This same problem has been encountered in the study
of the ML-liktsolu-
ifest typeshprovide the power of both existentials
(weak sums) and transparent sums (strong sums). By as-
cribing the translucent sum type
t=ft=t,t=tg.oeThetao
teve
to the closure the equationt=ft=t,t=tgis propagated
te
into the scope of the abstraction so that in particular#t
t=#tft=t,t=tg=t and thus the translation of
te
application is type correct.
The next step is to hide the representation of the value
environmentaswe did in the simply-typed case. If wesimply
abstract the typeofrom the abovetype expression we
ve
obtain
t=ft=t,t=tg.t::Omega.oeThetat
teveve
wheretis the abstract type of the value environment.
ve
However this fails to maketype sense because wehave ab-
stracted the type of the value environment in the closure
but not the corresponding argumenttype of the code of the
closure. The translation of application is ill-typed because
the value environment has abstract typet but the domain
ve
type of(# z)tisfy:t, z:intg.Sincetis abstract
teve
these twotypes are considered distinct. In order to simul-
taneously abstract the type of the value environmentand
the corresponding argumenttype in the code weneedto
replace both types with the same abstract typet.Todo
ve
this wemust show that the twotypes are equivalent. This
can be accomplished by requiring that the formal type envi-
ronment argument(tenv) is only instantiated with the type
environmentt. One waytoachieve this is to perform the
te
application of the code tot but the goal of closure con-
te
version is todelaysuch partial applications. An alternative
approach is to use translucency again andcoercethe code
so that it has the typeoe where:
oe=tenv=t::.
tete
fy:#ttenv, z:intg!
(#ttenv)!((#ttenv)Theta(#ttenv)Thetaint)
Adding the constrainttenv=tto the type of the code
te
has the effect of performing the type application at thetype-
level but delays the application at theterm-level. Note that
oeis a super-type of the original code typeoeaccording to
the rules of the translucent sum calculus.Consequently
the code remains the same (i.e. closed) and can still be
hoisted to the top level. In contrast if we had performed
the type application the resulting code would not be closed
(containing free references tot).
te
Sincetenv=tandt=ft=t,t=tg it follows that
tete
tenv=ft=t,t=tgand thus(#ttenv)=t. Consequently
ii
the data structure holding the components of the closure can
be coerced to the equivalenttype:
t=ft=t,t=tg.oeThetafy:t,z:intg
te
whereoeis
oe=tenv=t::.fy:t,z:intg!
tete
t!(tThetatThetaint)
Since this equivalenttype makes no mention of the type
environmenttexcept in the constraintfortenvwemay
te
drop the constraintont abstract the type of the value
te
environment(fy:t,z:intg) and abstract the kind of the
type environmentto obtain the closure type:
te
k:t::k:t::Omega.oeThetat
teteteveve
where
oe=tenv=t::k.t!t!(tThetatThetaint)
teteve
It is easy to deriveatype-preserving translation of appli-
cation corresponding to this representation of closures. We
simplyopenall of the existentials and pass the type envi-
ronment value environment and argument to the code.
Careful consideration of the foregoing discussion reveals
that only limited use is made of translucency. The equa-
tional constraintontis dropped from the existential (to
te
ensure privacy of environment representation) and the uni-
versally quantified variabletenvdoes not occur in the scope
of the abstraction. This suggests that a substantially sim-
pler mechanism than the full translucent sum calculus is
more appropriate for closure conversion. Hence weintro-
duce a special type writteno)oe of functions that must
be applied to the constructoroto yield a value of typeoe.
The following two rules govern this new type constructor:
Delta'o::Delta; Gamma'e:t:::oeDelta; Gamma'e:o)oe
Delta; Gamma'e:o)oe[o=t]Delta; Gamma'eo:oe
The first rule restricts the domain of type application to the
specific constructoro. This corresponds to restricting the
type tot=o:oeand propagating the equivalencet=ointo
oe. The actual type application foro)oeis permitted only
for constructors equivalenttoo. These two rules naturally
come from the necessity of delaying type applications for
closure conversion. Using this notation the type translation
ofo!obecomes
k:t::k:t::Omega:(t)t!o!o)Thetat:
teteteveteveve
The type of closures abstracts the kind of the type en-
vironment and the type of the value environment ensuring
that these maybechosen separately for each closure in the
system. As in the simply-typed case wehave obtained an
"object oriented" representation of polymorphic closures by
exploiting a combination of the type systems proposed by
Pierce and Ty Harper and Lil-
AFormal Account of Polymorphic Closure Conversion
In this section we present closure conversion for the predica-
tive subset of the second order-calculus. It has been argued
that the predicative fragment captures the "essence" of ML-
style polymorphism since there is a stratification between
monotypes (types not involving a quantifier) and polytypes
and instantiation of type variables is restricted to mono-
te it easy to use logical
relations to argue correctness in the same fashion as wedid
for the simply-typed-calculus.
The syntax of our source languageis defined as fol-
lows:
Kinds::= Omega
Constructorso::=bjtjo!o
Typesoe::=ojoe!oejt:::oe
Expressionse::=cjxjx:oe:ejLambdat:::ejeejeo
Valuesv::=cjx:oe:ejLambdat:::e
The type constructors (o) are described by kinds (). There
is only one kind (Omega) for but subsequent languages havea
richer kind structure so weintroduce kinds here for unifor-
mity. Closed constructors of kind Omega correspond to a subset
of types (the monotypes) in particular the types that do
not include quantifiers. Thus constructors of kind Omega can
be injected into types. Weleave this injection implicit and
treatoas both a constructor and a type.
A kind assignment Delta is a sequence that maps type vari-
ables to kinds and is of the formft::;:::;t::g(n).
nn
Typing judgements are of the form Delta; Gamma'e:oewhere the
free type variables of Gammaeandoeare contained in the do-
main of Delta and the free value variables ofeare contained
in the domain of Gamma. A typing judgement is derived from the
standard typing rules of the second-order-calculus (see for
.Abstract Closures
As in the simply typed case we break closure conversion
into abstract closure conversion and closure representation
stages. The abstract closure conversion stage forcon-
verts both-abstractions and Lambda-abstractions into abstract
closures consisting of code a type environmentandavalue
environment.
;cl
The syntax of the target languageis defined as fol-
lows:
Kinds::=OmegajhTheta:::Thetai
Con'so::=bjtjo!ojhoTheta:::Thetaoij
n
ho;:::;oijssoj
ni
Typesoe::=ojoe!oejt:::oejhoeTheta:::Thetaoeij
n
vcode(t::;oe;oe;oe)j
teteve
tcode(t::;oe;t::; oe)
teteve
Exp'se::=cjxjeejeojhe;:::;eijssej
ni
Lambdat:::x:oe:x:oe:ej
teteveve
Lambdat:::x:oe:Lambdat:::ejhhe;o;eii
teteveve
A product kindhTheta:::Thetaiis used to specify the
n
shape of type environments just as a product type specifies
the shape of value environments. Given constructorsowith
i
kind the constructorho;:::;oihas kindhTheta:::Thetai
inn
and is used as a type environment consisting ofo;:::;oin
n
a translated program.
The material on environment sharing carries over in a straight
forward manner.
There are twotypes of codes: the code for ordinary ab-Gammamust be chosen as subsets of the current assignments
straction Lambdat:::x:oe:x:oe:e and the code for type
teteveve
abstraction Lambdat:::x:oe:Lambdat:::e.Codes takeatype
teteveve
environment a value environment and a type or value argu-
ment respectively.Weintroduce the typesvcodeandtcode
to distinguish the types of codes from the types of closures
and to avoid partial applications of codes. Intuitivelythey
correspond to standard types as follows:
vcode(t::;oe;oe;oe)sst:::oe!oe!oe
teteveteteve
tcode(t::;oe;t::; oe)sst:::oe!t:::oe
teteveteteve
Only types excludingvcode andtcodecan be named
as a constructor. An abstract closurehhe;o;eiiconsists of
acodeeatype environment constructoroandavalue
environmente.
;cl
For the typing of kind assignments (Delta) map type
variables to kinds while type assignments (Gamma) map value
variables to types. The judgements of the static semantics
are as follows:
Delta'o::ois a well-formed constructor of kind.
Delta'oeoeis a well-formed type.
Delta'ojo::oandoare equivalent constructors.
Delta'oejoeoeandoeare equivalenttypes.
Delta; Gamma'e:oeeis a well-formed expression of typeoe.
The formation rules of types are standard. Wehavetoin-
troduce definitional equality of constructors and types to
account for projections of constructors from product kinds.
They consist of the equivalence rules for projections below
as well as the standard rules for equivalence and congruence.
Delta'ssho;:::;oijo::
inii
Delta'hss(o);:::;ss(o)ijo::hTheta:::Thetai
nn
The typing rules for expressions are standard except for the
rules for codes and closures. They are defined in Figure .
We require that code values be closed with respect to both
type variables as well as value variables. This allows us to
hoist code out of inner definitions to the top level.
Abstract closure conversion foris formulated as a
;cl
type-directed translation toby the deductivesystemin
Figures  and . The judgementDelta;Deltaoe;oemeans
envarg
thatoeis the translation ofoewhere Deltais a kind assign-
env
ment corresponding to a type environment and Deltais a
arg
kind assignment corresponding to a type argument(ifany).
This judgement also implicitly defines a translation from
constructors to constructors since source-level constructors
(o) are a subset of types (oe) and the translation maps con-
structors to constructors. In translated programs the type
variabletis used for type environments.
te
The judgementDelta;Delta;Gamma;Gammae;emeans
envargenvarg
eis a translation ofewhere Deltaand Deltaare as in the
envarg
type translation and Gammaand Gammaare type assignments
envarg
corresponding to the value environment and value argument
respectively.Atype environment corresponding to Deltaand
env
avalue environment corresponding to Gammaare implemented
env
in the target language bytypes of the formjDeltajandjGammaj
envenv
respectively defined below.
jft::;:::;t::gj=hTheta:::Thetai
nnn
jfx:oe;:::;x:oegj=hoeTheta:::Thetaoei
nnn
The most interesting rules are the term translations of
value and type abstractions.In each case an appropri-
ate type environment and value environmentmust be con-
structed as part of the closure. Thus assignments Deltaand
env
env
Delta]Deltaand Gamma]Gammarespectively. These assignments
envargenvarg
must be chosen so that all of the free value variables of the
term are contained in Gammaand further all of the free type
env
variables of the term and the value environmentmust be
contained in Delta.
env
The primary subtlety in these rules is that weneedtwo
type assignments Gammaand Gammato describe the value envi-
envenv
ronment of the closure depending upon the context. Gamma
env
is constructed from the context Delta;Delta;Gamma;Gammaand is
envargenvarg
used to build the environmentein the context where we
ve
are constructing the closure. In contrast Gammais obtained
env
from Gammavia the translation Delta;;Gamma;Gammaand cor-
envenvenvenv
responds to the type of the value environment in the context
of the closure itself.
The type correctness of the translation is proved byin-
duction on the derivation of the translation.
Theorem  (Type Correctness)IfDelta;Delta;Gamma;Gamma
envargenvarg
e;eandDelta]Delta;Gamma]Gamma'e:oethenft::jDeltajg]
envargenvargteenv
Delta;fx:jGammaGamma'e:oewhereDelta;Deltaoe;oe
argveenvarg
envarg
Delta;DeltaGamma;GammaandDelta;DeltaGamma;Gamma.
envargenvenvargarg
envarg
We can prove the operational correctness of the trans-
lation using logical relations in the same fashion as wedid
for the simply typed case because the source language is
restricted to the predicative polymorphism.
.Closure Representation
In this section we present closure representation for the sec-
ond order language. Weusetypes with existentialkindsto
abstract the representation of type environments and exis-
tential types to abstract the representation of value environ-
ments. Further weintroduce the typeoe)oe derived from
translucenttypes to solvethetyping problems discussed in
the overview.
The target language for polymorphic closure representa-
;
tion called is defined as follows:
Kinds::=kjOmegajhTheta:::Thetai
n
Typesoe::=bjtjhoeTheta:::Thetaoeijhoe;:::;oeijssoej
nni
t:::oejoe)oejoe!oejt:::oejk:oe
Exp'se::=xjcjx:oe:ejeejLambdat:::ejeoej
he;:::;eijssej
ni
packoewitheasoej
openeast::withx:oeine
packwitheasoej
openeaskwithx:oeine
There is no distinction between types and constructors for
;
because type application is no longer restricted to just
;
monotypes.needs this impredicativity because some
monotypes from the source language are translated into types
with quantifiers. To simplify the language weprovide full
abstractions (and Lambda) instead of codes which abstract more
than one argument at a time.
Toprovide types with existential kinds we need to in-
troduce kind variableskand kind contexts for the typing
;
judgements of. A kind contextKis simply a sequence
of kind variablesfk;:::;kg(n). The typing judge-
n
ments of the language consist of the following:
K;Delta'oe::oehas kind.
K;Delta'oejoe::oeandoeare equal types of kind.
K;Delta;Gamma'e:oeehas typeoe.
ft::g;fx:oe;x:oeg'e:oe
teteveve
Delta; Gamma'Lambdat:::x:oe:x:oe:e:vcode(t::;oe;oe;oe)
teteveve
ft::;t::Omegag;fx:oeg'e:oe
tete
Delta; Gamma'Lambdat:::x:oe:Lambdat::Omega:e:tcode(t::;oe;t;oe)
teteveve
Delta; Gamma'e:vcode(t::;oe;oe;oe)Delta'o:Delta; Gamma'e:oe[o=t]
teteve
Delta; Gamma'hhe;o;eii:(oe!oe)[o=t]
Delta; Gamma'e:tcode(t::;oe;t;oe)Delta'o:Delta; Gamma'e:oe[o=t]
teteve
Delta; Gamma'hhe;o;eii:(t:o)[o=t]
Figure : Typing Rules for Code and Closures
Delta;Deltab;bft::Omega;:::;t::Omegag;Deltat;sst
envarg
Delta;Deltat;t
envarg
Delta;Deltaoe;oeDelta;Deltaoe;
envargenvarg
Delta;Deltaoe!oe;oe!oe
envarg
Delta;Deltat;oDeltaDeltaDeltaDelta;Deltat;o
envarg
Delta;Deltaft::Omega;:::;t::Omegag;ho;:::;oi
envarg
Delta;Deltaoe;oeDeltaDeltaDeltaDelta;Deltaoe;oe
envarg
Delta;Deltafx:oe;:::;x:oeg;fx:oe;:::;x:oeg
envargn
Figure : Polymorphic Abstract Closure Conversion: Types and Type Assignments
(const)Delta;Delta;Gamma;Gammac;c
envargenvarg
(env)Delta;Delta;fx:oe;:::;x:oeg;Gammax;ssx
envarg
(arg)Delta;Delta;Gamma;Gammax;x(xDom(Gamma))
envargenvarg
Delta;Delta;Gamma;GammaDelta;o
envargenvargteenvargenvargve
env
Delta;;Gamma;GammaDelta;;oe;oe
envenvenvenv
(abs)
Delta;;;Gamma;fx:oege;e
envenv
Delta;Delta;Gamma;Gammax:oe:e;hhLambdat::jDeltaj:x:jGammaj:x:oe:e;o;eii
envargenvarg
Delta;Delta;Gamma;GammaDelta;oDelta;Delta;Gamma;GammaGamma;e
envargenvarg
env
Delta;;Gamma;Gamma
(tabs)
envenvenv
Delta;Delta;Gamma;GammaLambdat::Omega:e;hhLambdat::jDeltaj:x:jGammaj:Lambdat::Omega:e;o;eii
envargenvarg
Delta;Delta;Gamma;Gammae;
envargenvarg
(app)
Delta;Delta;Gamma;Gammaee;ee
envargenvarg
Delta;Delta;Gamma;Gammae;eDelta;Deltaoe;oe
envargenvarg
(tapp)
Delta;Delta;Gamma;Gammaeoe;eoe
envargenvarg
Delta;Delta;Gamma;Gammax;e
envargenvargi
(context)
Delta;Delta;Gamma;Gammafx:oe;:::;x:oeg;he;:::;ei
envargenvarg
Figure : Polymorphic Abstract Closure Conversion: Terms
teteve
veve
teteve
tevete
te
tevete
te
nargiite
(tDom(Delta))
arg
oeDelta;Delta]ft::Omegagoe;oe
envarg
Delta;Deltat::: oe;t::: oe
envarg
envargn
n
n
n
envargn
n
nn
n
nnargiive
arg
Delta;Delta;Gamma;GammaGamma;e
env
teveteve
envenv
teenvargenvargve
env
Delta;ft::Omegag;Gamma;;e;e
envenv
teveteve
envenv
eDelta;Delta;Gamma;Gammae;e
envargenvarg
envarg
i
nn
n
The definition of the formation rules definitional equal-to study novel approaches to tag-free garbage collection and
ityoftypes and typing rules are standard except that poly-the other compiler provides a general framework for analyz-
morphic typet:::oecan be instantiated too)oe[o=t
typeowith kindas described in the overview. The details
of the typing rules are found in the tec
We define the closure representation stage as a type-
;cl;
directed translation fromto.We begin by defining
a translation from source constructors and types to target
type as follows:
jtj=t
jbj=b
jhoe;:::;oeij=hjoej;:::;joeji
nn
jssoej=ssjoej
ii
jhoeTheta:::Thetaoeij=hjoejTheta:::Thetajoeji
nn
jvcode(t::; oe;oe;oe)j=t:::joej!joej!joej
veve
jtcode(t::; oe;s::;oe)j=t:::joej!s:::joej
veve
joe!oej=k:t::k:t::Omega:h(t)t!joej!joej)Thetati
js:::oej=k:t::k:t::Omega:h(t)t!s:::joej)Thetati
The code types are translated to the corresponding types
described in the previous section. The translation of a func-
tion type abstracts the kind of the type environmentk and
the type of the value environmentt.Thetype environment
tis paired with the code by using an existential type. Since
the type of a code is instantiated byt only the type envi-
ronment of the closure can be given to the code. The code
and the value environment are paired as in the simply-typed
case. The translation ofhas the same structure as that of
an arrowtype.
The translation of expressions is summarized in Figure .
The kind of the type environment the type environment
and the type of the value environment are packed with the
pair of the code and the value environment. In the transla-
tion of applications the type environment is obtained from
a closure byanopenexpression and the code and the value
environment are obtained by projections.Then the type
environment the value environment and the argumentof
application are passed to the code.
The type correctness of the translation is proven byin-
duction on the derivation of the translation.The typing
rules foroe)oeare essential to prove the cases for the
translations of closures.
Theorem  (Type Correctness)IfDelta; Gammae:oe;e
then;;Delta;jGammaj'e:joej.
The operational correctness of the translation can be
proven using logical relations as in the simply typed case.
However the definition of the relations is more complicated
because of the presence of polymorphic types and types of
;cl
the formss(oe) in the language. The relations and the
i
proof appear in the tec
Summary and Conclusions
Wehave presented a type-theoretic account of closure con-
version for the simply-typed and polymorphic-calculi. Our
translations are unique in that they map well-typed source
terms to well-typed target terms. This facilitates correctness
proofs allows other type-directed transforms suchasCPS
conversion or unboxing to be applied after closure conver-
sion and supports run-time examination of types for tag-free
garbage collection.
Wehave put the ideas in this paper to practical use in
two separate compilers for ML: one compiler is being used
ing types at run time to determine the shapes of objects.
Propagating types through closure conversion is necessary
for both compilers so that types can be examined at run
time.For simplicity the current implementations of our
compilers use abstract closure conversion. As many com-
pilers our compilers avoid creation of closures for known-
functions. Such optimization does not introduce any prob-
lem.
Lightweight closure conversion proposed byWand and
Stecy also be formulated as type-preserving trans-
lation as our closure conversions. However the definition of
translation may become complicated because the typeofthe
closure as well as the translation of abstraction depends on
which free variables passed directly.
In some implementation a closure is represented by fold-
ing code pointer into the environmenh repre-
sentation maybeformulated as abstract closure conversion
with some modifications. However closure representation
for such closures seems to need more powerful type system.
Acknowledgements
Wewould like to thank Andrzej Filinski Mark Leone Ben-
jamin Pierce and David Tarditi for their comments and
suggestions.
References
.-L. Curien and J.-J.Levy. Explicit
substitutions. InACM Symp. on Principles of Programming
Languages .
Compiling with Continuations.Cambridge
University Press .
tinuation-passing closure-
passing style. InACM Symp. on Principles of Programming
Languages .
t for the program-
ming language Pascal. Master's thesis University of Arizona
.
hine.Polymorphism
() .
.-L. Curien and M. Mauny. The categorical
abstract machine. InFunctional Programming Languages
and Computer Architecture pages - .
riedman. Equalitybetween functionals. In R. Parikh
editorLogic Colloquium '. Norh-Holland .
ype system for closure conversion. InThe
Workshop on Types for Program Analysis.
ism and
CPS conversion. InACM Symp. on Principles of Program-
ming Languages.
ype-theoretic approach
to higher-order modules. InACM Symp. on Principles of
Programming Languages pages - .
Standard
ML.Technical Report ECS-LFCS-- Laboratory for
the Foundations of Computer Science Edinburgh University
Mar. .
hell. On the type structure of Stan-
dard ML.ACM Transaction on Programming Languages
and Systems () .
Delta; Gammae:vcode(t::;oe;oe;oe);eDelta; Gammae:oe;e
tete
ve
(vcl)
Delta; Gammahhe; o; eii:oe!oe;pack
ve
Delta; Gammae:oe!oe;eDelta; Gammae:oe;e
Delta; Gammaee:oe;opene
(app)
withy:ht)t!joej!joejThetati
in(ssy)t(ssy)e
Delta; Gammae:tcode(t::;oe;t::; oe);eDelta; Gammae:oe;e
tete
ve
(tcl)
Delta; Gammahhe; o; eii:t:::oe;pack;joj;joejwithhe;eiasjt:::oej
ve
Delta; Gammae
Delta; Gammae o:oe[o=t];openeask;t;t
(tapp)
withy:ht)t!t:::joejThetati
in(ssy)t(ssy)joj
Figure : Closure Representation
intensional type analysis. InACM Symp. on Principles of
Programming Languages pages - .
bda lifting: Transforming programs to re-
cursive equations. InFunctional Programming Language and
Computer Architecture LNCS  pages -. Springer-
Verlag .
. Hudak. Realistic compilation by program
translation -detailed summary -. InACM Symp. on Prin-
ciples of Programming Languages pages - .
heme.
InProc. of the SIGPLAN ' Symp. on Compiler Construc-
tion .
. Landin. The mechanical evaluation of expressions.Com-
puter Journal :- .
y.Unboxed objects and polymorphic typing. InACM
Symp. on Principles of Programming Languages .
y. Manifest types modules and separate compila-
tion. InACM Symp. on Principles of Programming Lan-
guages pages - .
Proc. ACM
Conf. Lisp and Functional Programming pages -
. Revised v].
ofte and R. Harper.The Definition of Stan-
dardML. MIT Press .
yped closure
conversion. Technical Report CMU-CS-- School of
Computer Science Carnegie Mellon University July .
hell and G. D. Plotkin. Abstract types haveexis-
tential type.ACM Transaction on Programming Languages
and Systems () .
elleisen and R. Harper. Abstract models
of memory management. InFunctional Programming Lan-
guages and Computer Architecture pages - June .
wn. An
ad hoc approach to the implementation of polymorphism.
ACM Transaction on Programming Languages and Systems
() .
yle polymorphic
record calculi. InACM Symp. on Principles of Programming
Languages .
veve
ve
;joj;joejwithhe;eiasjoe!oej
teve
ve
ask;t;t
teteve
teveve
te
veve
ve
teve
ve
:t:::oe;e
teteve
teveve
te
urner. Simple type-theoretic foun-
dations for object-oriented programming.Journal of Func-
tional Programming ():- Apr. . A preliminary
version appeared in Principles of Programming Languages
 and as UniversityofEdinburgh technical report ECS-
LFCS-- under the title "Object-Oriented Program-
ming Without RecursiveTypes".
bda-definability in the full type hierarchy.
InTo H.B.Curry: Essays on Combinatory Logic Lambda
Calculus and Formalism. Academic Press .
. Objects as closures. InProc. ACM Conf. Lisp
and Functional Programming .
terpreters for higher-order
programming languages. InProceedings of the Annual ACM
Conference pages - .
t closure represen-
tations. InProc. ACM Conf. Lisp and Functional Program-
ming .
ype-based compiler for Stan-
dard ML. InProgramming Language Design and Its imple-
menation pages - .
Completeness invariance and lambda-
definability.Journal of Symbolic Logic :- .
yped-calculus.In-
formation and Control  .
heme. Master's
thesis MIT .
ait. Intensional interpretation of functionals of finite
type.Journal of Symbolic Logic () .
olmach. Tag-free garbage collection using explicit type
parameters. InProc. ACM Conf. Lisp and Functional Pro-
gramming pages - June .
and and P. Steckler. Selective and lightweight closure
conversion. InACM Symp. on Principles of Programming
Languages .
Typed Closure Con
Lambda
Yasuhiko MinamideGreg MorrisettRobert Harper
Research Institute for Mathematical SciencesSchool of Computer ScienceSchool of Computer Science
Kyoto UniversityCarnegie Mellon UniversityCarnegie Mellon University
Kyoto - JapanPittsburgh PA -Pittsburgh PA -
nan@kurims.kyoto-u.ac.jpjgmorris@cs.cmu.edurwh@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
We study the typing properties ofclosureconversionfor
simply-typed and polymorphic-calculi . Unlikemostac-
counts of closure conversion which only treat the untyped
-calculus we translate well-typed source programs to well-
typed target programs. This allows later compiler phases to
take advantage of types for representation analysis and tag-
free garbage collection and it facilitates correctness proofs.
Our account of closure conversion for the simply-typed lan-
guage takes advantage of a simple model of objects bymap-
ping closures toexistentials.Closure conversion for the
polymorphic language requires additional type machinery
namelytranslucencyin the style of Harper and Lillibridge's
module calculus to express the type of a closure.
Introduction
Closureconversion
transformation that achieves a separation between code and
data.Functions with free variables are replaced bycode
abstracted on an extra environment parameter. Free vari-
ables in the body of the function are replaced by references
to the environment. The abstracted code is "partially ap-
plied" to an explicitly constructed environmentproviding
the bindings for these variables. This "partial application"
of the code to its environment is in fact suspended until the
function is actually applied to its argument; the suspended
application is called a "closure" a data structure containing
pure code and a representation of its environment.
A critical decision in closure conversion is the choice of
representation of the environment as a data structure --
for example whether to use a "flat" "linked" or hybrid
representation.This decision is influenced by a desire to
minimize closure creation time the space consumed byan
environment and the time to access a given variable in an
environment property of closure con-
version is that the representation of the environmentispri-
vateto the closure and is not visible from the outside. This
affords considerable flexibility in the representation of envi-
Lambda
This researchwas performed while the author was visiting the
Fox Project at Carnegie Mellon University.
To appear POPL '.
version
ronments and is thus exploited to good advantage byShao
and and Stec
Most accounts consider closure conversion as a transfor-
mation tountypedterms irrespective of whether or not the
source term is t
pilers that make little or no use of types in the backendor
at run time. However when compiling typed languages it is
often advantageous to propagate type information through
each stage of the compiler and to make use of types at link
or even run time. For example Leroy's representation analy-
ypes to determine procedure calling conven-
ta-
tion of types at run time to access components of a record.
In current compilers these phases must occurbeforeclosure
conversion because the output of closure conversion is un-
typed. Compilation strategies for polymorphic languages
such as those proposed by Morrisonet al.
ypes at run time to
support unboxed representations and non-parametric oper-
ators including printing and structural equality.Tag-free
polymorphic programming languages also relies upon types
at run time to determine the size and the pointers of ob-
jects. To support any of these implementation strategies it
is necessary to propagate type informationthroughclosure
conversion and into the generated code. Consequentlythe
purpose of this paper is to showhow closure conversion can
be formulated as atype-preserving transform.
We are therefore interested intype-basedtransformations
as a basis for compiling polymorphic languages. The crucial
idea is to define a compiler as a series of transformations on
both the program and its type possibly relying on type in-
formation to guide the transformation itself. Each stage of
the compiler is thus viewed as a type-preserving translation
between typed intermediate languages. Examples of such
translations are given by Lero
to the practical advantages of propagating type information
through the stages of a compiler type-directed translation
also facilitates correctness proofs by defining the invariants
of the transformation as a type-indexed family oflogical re-
lations
We describe closure conversion in two stages. The first
stageabstract closureconversionis a type-based transla-
tion from the source language into a target language with
explicit closures. The translation is described as a deductive
system in which the representation of the environmentmay
be chosen independently for each closure. In this wayvari-
