————————————— In 32nd USENIX Security Symposium —————————————

Trojan Source:
Invisible Vulnerabilities
Nicholas Boucher

Ross Anderson

University of Cambridge

University of Cambridge

Computer Science & Technology

and University of Edinburgh

nicholas.boucher@cl.cam.ac.uk

ross.anderson@cl.cam.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a new type of attack in which source code is maliciously encoded so that it appears different to a compiler
and to the human eye. This attack exploits subtleties in textencoding standards such as Unicode to produce source code
whose tokens are logically encoded in a different order from
the one in which they are displayed, leading to vulnerabilities
that cannot be perceived directly by human code reviewers.
‘Trojan Source’ attacks, as we call them, pose an immediate
threat both to first-party software and of supply-chain compromise across the industry. We present working examples of
Trojan Source attacks in C, C++, C#, JavaScript, Java, Rust,
Go, Python, SQL, Bash, Assembly, and Solidity. We propose
definitive compiler-level defenses, and describe other mitigating controls that can be deployed in editors, repositories, and
build pipelines while compilers are upgraded to block this
attack. We document an industry-wide coordinated disclosure
for these vulnerabilities; as they affect most compilers, editors, and repositories, the exercise teaches how different firms,
open-source communities, and other stakeholders respond to
vulnerability disclosure.

1

coding of otherwise non-malicious source code has not so far
been explored.
Consider a supply-chain attacker who seeks to inject vulnerabilities into software upstream of the ultimate targets, as happened in the recent Solar Winds incident [2]. Two methods an
adversary may use to accomplish such a goal are suborning an
insider to commit vulnerable code into software systems, and
contributing subtle vulnerabilities into open-source projects.
In order to prevent or mitigate such attacks, it is essential for
developers to perform at least one code or security review of
every submitted contribution. However, this critical control
may be bypassed if the vulnerabilities do not appear in the
source code displayed to the reviewer, but are hidden in the
encoding layer underneath. Such an attack is quite feasible,
as we will now demonstrate.
In this paper, we make the following contributions:
• We define a novel class of vulnerabilities, which we
call Trojan Source attacks, and which use maliciously
encoded but semantically permissible source code modifications to introduce invisible software vulnerabilities.
• We provide working examples of Trojan Source vulnerabilities in C, C++, C#, JavaScript, Java, Rust, Go, Python,
SQL, Bash, Assembly, and Solidity.

Introduction

What if it were possible to trick compilers into emitting binaries that did not match the logic visible in source code? We
demonstrate that this is not only possible for a broad class of
modern compilers, but easily exploitable.
We show that subtleties of modern expressive text encodings, such as Unicode, can be used to craft source code that
appears visually different to developers and to compilers. The
difference can be exploited to invisibly alter the logic in an
application and introduce targeted vulnerabilities.
The belief that trustworthy compilers emit binaries correctly implementing the algorithms defined in source code is
a foundational assumption of software. It is well-known that
malicious compilers can produce binaries containing vulnerabilities [1]; as a result, there has been significant effort devoted
to verifying compilers and mitigating their exploitable sideeffects. However, to our knowledge, producing vulnerable
binaries via unmodified compilers by manipulating the en-

• We describe effective defenses that must be employed
by compilers, as well as other defenses that can be used
in editors, repositories, and build pipelines, and discuss
the limitations of these defenses.
• We document the coordinated disclosure process we
used to disclose this vulnerability across the industry,
and what it teaches about the response to disclosure.
• We raise a new question about what it means for a compiler to be trustworthy.

2
2.1

Background
Compiler Security

Compilers translate high-level programming languages into
lower-level representations such as architecture-specific machine instructions or portable bytecode. They seek to im-

Table 1: Unicode directionality formatting characters relevant to reordering attacks.
See Bidi specification for complete list [3].
Abbreviation
LRE
RLE
LRO
RLO
LRI
RLI
FSI
PDF
PDI

Code Point
U+202A
U+202B
U+202D
U+202E
U+2066
U+2067
U+2068
U+202C
U+2069

Name
Left-to-Right Embedding
Right-to-Left Embedding
Left-to-Right Override
Right-to-Left Override
Left-to-Right Isolate
Right-to-Left Isolate
First Strong Isolate
Pop Directional Formatting
Pop Directional Isolate

Description
Try treating following text as left-to-right.
Try treating following text as right-to-left.
Force treating following text as left-to-right.
Force treating following text as right-to-left.
Force treating following text as left-to-right without affecting adjacent text.
Force treating following text as right-to-left without affecting adjacent text.
Force treating following text in direction indicated by the next character.
Terminate nearest LRE, RLE, LRO, or RLO.
Terminate nearest LRI or RLI.

plement the formal specifications of their input languages,
deviations from which are considered to be bugs.
Since the 1960s [4], researchers have investigated formal
methods to mathematically prove that a compiler’s output correctly implements the source code supplied to it [5, 6]. Many
of the discrepancies between source code logic and compiler
output logic stem from compiler optimizations, about which
it can be difficult to reason [7]. These optimizations may also
cause side-effects that have security consequences [8].

2.2

firms and government departments, supply-chain attacks have
gained urgent attention from the US White House [12].
Adversaries may introduce vulnerabilities in supply-chain
attacks through modifying source code, compromising build
systems, or attacking the distribution of published software [13, 14]. Distribution attacks are mitigated by software
producers signing binaries, so attacks on the earlier stages of
the pipeline are particularly attractive. Attacks on upstream
software such as widely-utilized packages can affect multiple dependent products, potentially compromising whole
ecosystems. As supply-chain threats involve multiple organizations, modeling and mitigating them requires consideration
of technical, economic, and social factors [15].
Open-source software provides a significant vector through
which supply-chain attacks can be launched [16], and is
ranked as one of OWASP’s Top 10 web application security
risks [17].

Text Encodings

Digital text is stored as an encoded sequence of numerical values, or code points, that correspond with characters according
to the relevant specification. While single-script specifications such as ASCII were historically prevalent, modern text
encodings have standardized1 around Unicode [9].
At the time of writing, Unicode defines 143,859 characters
across 154 different scripts in addition to various non-script
character sets (such as emojis) plus a plethora of control
characters. While its specification provides a mapping from
numerical code points to characters, the binary representation
of those code points is determined by which of various encodings is used, with one of the most common being UTF-8.
Text rendering is performed by interpreting encoded bytes
as numerical code points according to the chosen encoding,
then looking up the characters in the relevant specification,
then resolving all control characters, and finally displaying
the glyphs provided for each character in the chosen font.

2.3

3
3.1

Attack Methodology
Reordering

Internationalized text encodings require support for both leftto-right languages such as English and Russian, and rightto-left languages such as Hebrew and Arabic. When mixing
scripts with different display orders, there must be a deterministic way to resolve conflicting directionality. For Unicode, this is implemented in the Bidirectional, or Bidi, Algorithm [3].
In some scenarios, the default ordering set by the Bidi Algorithm may not be sufficient; for these cases, Bidi control
characters are provided. Bidi control characters are invisible characters that enable switching the display ordering of
groups of characters.
Table 1 provides a list of Bidi control characters relevant to
this attack. Of note are LRI and RLI, which format subsequent
text as left-to-right and right-to-left respectively, and are both
closed by PDI.
Bidi control characters enable even single-script characters to be displayed in an order different from their logical

Supply-Chain Attacks

Supply-chain attacks are those in which an adversary tries
to introduce targeted vulnerabilities into deployed applications, operating systems, and software components [10]. Once
published, such vulnerabilities are likely to persist within the
affected ecosystem even if patches are later released [11].
Following a number of attacks that compromised multiple
1 According to scans by w3techs.com/technologies/details/en-utf8, 97% of
the most accessed 10 million websites in 2021 use UTF-8 Unicode encodings.

2

encoding. This fact has previously been exploited to disguise
the file extensions of malware disseminated by email [18]
and to craft adversarial examples for NLP machine-learning
pipelines [19].
As an example, consider the following Unicode character
sequence:
RLI a b c PDI

result in a compiler or interpreter syntax error. To avoid such
errors, we can exploit two general principles of programming
languages:
• Comments – Most programming languages allow comments within which all text (including control characters)
is ignored by compilers and interpreters.
• Strings – Most programming languages allow string
literals that may contain arbitrary characters, including
control characters.

which will be displayed as:
c b a

While both comments and strings will have syntax-specific
semantics indicating their start and end, these bounds are
not respected by Bidi control characters. Therefore, by placing Bidi control characters exclusively within comments and
strings, we can smuggle them into source code in a manner
that most compilers will accept.
Making a random modification to the display order of characters on a line of valid source code is not particularly interesting, as it is very likely to be noticed by a human reviewer.
Our key insight is that we can reorder source code characters
in such a way that the resulting display order also represents
syntactically valid source code.

All Unicode Bidi control characters are restricted to affecting a single paragraph, as a newline character will explicitly
close any unbalanced control characters, namely those that
lack a corresponding closing character.

3.2

Isolate Shuffling

In the Bidi specification, isolates are groups of characters that
are treated as a single entity; that is, the entire isolate will be
moved as a single block when the display order is overridden.
Isolates can be nested. For example, consider the Unicode
character sequence:

3.5

RLI LRI a b c PDI LRI d e f PDI PDI

Bringing all this together, we arrive at a novel supply-chain
attack on source code. By injecting Unicode Bidi control characters into comments and strings, an adversary can produce
syntactically-valid source code in most modern languages
for which the display order of characters presents logic that
diverges from the real logic. In effect, we anagram program
A into program B.
Such an attack could be challenging for a human code
reviewer to detect, as the rendered source code looks perfectly
acceptable. If the change in logic is subtle enough to go
undetected in subsequent testing, an adversary could introduce
targeted vulnerabilities without being detected. We provide
working examples of this attack in the following section.
Yet more concerning is the fact that Bidi control characters
persist through the copy-and-paste functions on most modern
browsers, editors, and operating systems. Any developer who
copies code from an untrusted source into a protected code
base may inadvertently introduce an invisible vulnerability.
Code copying is already a significant source of real-world
security exploits [20].

which will be displayed as:
d e f a b c
Embedding multiple layers of LRI and RLI within each
other enables the near-arbitrary reordering of strings. This
gives an adversary fine-grained control, so they can manipulate the display order of text into an anagram of its logicallyencoded order.

3.3

Compiler Manipulation

Like most non-text rendering systems, compilers and interpreters do not typically process formatting control characters, including Bidi control characters, prior to parsing source
code. This can be used to engineer a targeted gap between the
visually-rendered source code as seen by a human eye, and
the raw bytes of the encoded source code as evaluated by a
compiler.
We can exploit this gap to create adversarially-encoded
text that is understood differently by human reviewers and by
compilers.

3.4

Novel Supply-Chain Attack

3.6

Threat Model

More formally, we define the threat model for Trojan Source
attacks as an active adversary who seeks to inject adversarial
logic into targeted software. If such software has an upstream
dependency on further software, the adversary may target that
instead in a supply chain attack. We define the adversary as
having the following access:

Syntax Adherence

Most well-designed programming languages will not allow
arbitrary control characters in source code, as they will be
viewed as tokens meant to affect the logic. Thus, randomly
placing Bidi control characters in source code will typically
3

Figure 1: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source early-return attack Figure 2: Rendered text of a Trojan Source early-return attack
in Python.
in Python.
• write access to that target software’s source code, such
as via a direct pull request, or

Consider, for example, the case of docstrings – formal comments that purport to document the purpose of a function
– which are considered good practice in software development. In languages where docstrings can be located within a
function definition, an adversary need only find a plausible
location to write the word return (or its language-specific
equivalent) in a docstring comment, and then reorder the comment such that the return statement is executed immediately
following the comment.
Figures 1 and 2 depict the encoded bytes and rendered text,
respectively, of an early-return attack in Python3. Viewing
the rendered text of the source code in Figure 2, one would
expect the value of bank['alice'] to be 50 after program
execution. However, the value of bank['alice'] remains
100 after the program executes. This is because the word
return in the docstring is actually executed due to a Bidi
control character, causing the function to return prematurely
and the code which subtracts value from a user’s bank account
to never run.
This technique is not specific to docstrings; any comment
or string literal that can be manipulated by an adversary could
hide an early-return statement.

• write access to an upstream dependency of the target software, such as via a pull request against an open source
project, or
• the ability to post code samples that will be copied and
pasted into the target software’s source code, such as via
question answering websites [21, 22].

3.7

Generality

We have implemented the above attack methodology and the
examples in the following section with Unicode. Many modern compilers accept Unicode source code, as will be noted in
our experimental evaluation. However, this attack paradigm
should work with any text specification that enables the manipulation of display order, which is necessary to support
internationalized text.
Should the Unicode specification be supplanted by another
standard, then in the absence of specific defenses, we believe that it is very likely to provide the same bidirectional
functionality used to perform this attack. To substantiate this
conjecture, we repeated the experiments presented throughout
this paper using Chinese standard GB18030 and Israeli standard SI1311:2002 in addition to UTF-8 achieving the same
results across all three specifications.

4

4.2

In this exploit technique, text that appears to be legitimate
code actually exists within a comment and is thus never executed. This allows an adversary to show a reviewer some
code that appears to be executed but is not present from the
perspective of the compiler or interpreter. For example, an
adversary can comment out an important conditional, and
then use Bidi control characters to make it appear to be still
present.
This method is easiest to implement in languages that support mutliline comments. An adversary begins a line of code
with a multiline comment that includes the code to be commented out and closes the comment on the same line. They
then need only insert Bidi control characters to make it appear as if the comment is closed before the code via isolate
shuffling.
Figures 3 and 4 depict the encoded bytes and rendered text,
respectively, of a commenting-out attack in C. Viewing the
rendered text makes it appear that, since the user is not an

Exploit Techniques

There are a variety of ways to exploit the adversarial encoding
of source code. The underlying principle is the same in each:
use Bidi control characters to create a syntactically valid
reordering of source code characters in the target language.
In the following section, we propose three general types
of exploits that work across multiple languages. We do not
claim that this list is exhaustive.

4.1

Commenting-Out

Early Returns

In the early-return exploit technique, adversaries disguise a
genuine return statement as a comment or string literal, so
they can cause a function to return earlier than it appears to.
4

Figure 3: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in C.

Figure 4: Rendered text of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in C.

admin, no text should be printed. However, upon execution
the program prints You are an admin. The conditional does
not actually exist; in the logical encoding, its text is wholly
within the comment.
The previous example is aided by the Unicode feature that
directionality-aware punctuation characters are displayed in
reverse within right-to-left settings, e.g. { becomes }. This can
be particularly insidious for the following symbols typically
used for inequality tests and bit shifts: <<, >>, <, and >.

characters that look the same, known as homoglyphs, such as
the Cyrillic letter ‘х’ which typically renders identical to the
Latin letter ‘x’ used in English but occupies a different code
point. Depending on the context, the use of other characterencoding tricks may be more desirable than a stretched-string
attack using Bidi control characters.

5
5.1

4.3

Stretched Strings

Related Work
URL Security

Deceptively encoded URLs have long been a tool of choice
for spammers [23], with one of the earliest documented examples being the case of paypaI.com. This July 2000 campaign
sought to trick users into disclosing passwords for paypal.com
by registering a domain with the lowercase l replaced with
the visually similar uppercase I [24].
These domain attacks become even more severe with the
introduction of Unicode, which has a much larger set of visually similar characters, or homoglyphs, than ASCII. In fact,
Unicode produces a security report which spends considerable length discussing domain-related concerns [25], and the
topic of homoglyphs in URLs has been thoroughly examined
in the literature [26–29].
Punycode [30], a standard for converting Unicode URLs to
ASCII, bootstraps DNS support for internationalized domains
but does not mitigate homoglyph attacks. It is used in conjunction with IDNA [31], which sets rules for handling Bidi
and invisible characters to prevent some look-alike domains.

In this exploit technique, text that appears to be outside a
string literal is actually located within it. This allows an adversary to manipulate string comparisons, for example causing
strings which appear identical to give rise to a non-equal
comparison.
Figures 5 and 6 depict the encoded bytes and rendered
text, respectively, of a stretched-string attack in JavaScript.
While it appears that the user’s access level is "user" and
therefore nothing should be written to the console, the code
in fact outputs You are an admin. This is because the apparent
comment following the comparison isn’t actually a comment,
but included in the comparison’s string literal.
In general, the stretched-strings technique will allow an
adversary to cause string comparisons to fail. In languages
that support a limited set of alternate literals, such as regular
expression literals in JavaScript, the stretched string technique
can be generalized to apply. A small set of languages, such
as Ruby, support Bidi control characters in identifiers such
as variable names, and in these languages this technique also
generalizes.
However, there are other, perhaps simpler, ways that an
adversary can cause a string comparison to fail without visual
effect. For example, the adversary can place invisible characters – that is, characters in Unicode that render to the absence
of a glyph – such as the Zero Width Space2 (ZWSP) into
string literals used in comparisons. Although these invisible
characters do not change the way a string literal renders, they
will cause string comparisons to fail. Another option is to use

5.2

Adversarial NLP

Bidi control characters and homoglyphs have both been used
to create adversarial examples in the machine learning NLP
setting [19]. These characters, together with invisible characters such as zero-width spaces and deletions control characters, are used to generate strings that look visually identical
to some target string but are represented by different Unicode encodings. Optimal encodings are discovered using a
gradient-free optimization method that can be used to manipulate the performance of models in both a targeted and
untargeted fashion.

2 Unicode character U+200B

5

Figure 5: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source stretched-string
attack in JavaScript.

Figure 6: Rendered text of a Trojan Source stretched-string
attack in JavaScript.

5.3

are an admin.’ due to Trojan Source attacks using Bidi control
character encodings.
For this attack paradigm to work, the compilers or interpreters used must accept some form of Unicode input, such
as UTF-8. We find that this is true for the overwhelming majority of languages in modern use. It is also necessary for the
language to syntactically support modern internationalized
text in string literals or comments.
Thanks to our disclosure process, compilers and interpreters are starting to employ defenses that emit errors or
warnings when this attack is detected, as are some editors,
but we found no evidence of such behavior in any of the experiments we conducted before starting the process. At the
time of writing, none of the language specifications have been
changed to prevent Trojan Source attacks. We discuss the
results of the disclosure process later.
All proofs of concept referenced in this paper have been
made available online3 . We have also created a website to
help disseminate knowledge of this vulnerability pattern to
all developer communities4 .

Visually Deceptive Malware

Bidi overrides have historically been used in the wild to
change the appearance of file extensions [18]. This technique
aids email-based distribution of malware, as it can deceive a
user into running an executable file when they believe they
are opening something more benign. Similarly, directionality
control characters have been used in at least one family of malware to disguise the names of malicious system services [32].
Attacks have also been proposed in which an adversary uses
homoglyphs to create filenames that look visually similar to
key system files, and then replaces references to those files
with the adversarial homoglyph version [33].
In general, purposefully confusing code written to obscure
vulnerabilities is known as underhanded source code, and a
series of competitions have been historically held to evaluate proposed underhanded methods [34]. Many vulnerability
patterns fall under this heading. Common techniques used in
underhanded source code competitions include replacing numbers with letters, leveraging out-of-bounds reads and writes,
swapping equality and assignment operators, and misusing
macros. Trojan Source attacks could be considered to belong
to this class of vulnerability patterns.

5.4

6.2

The following sections describe and evaluate Trojan Source
attack proofs-of-concept against specific programming languages. The results are presented in Table 2.

Software Vulnerabilities

In addition to purposefully crafted malware, attackers can
exploit common vulnerabilities in otherwise benign software
to introduce adversarial behavior [35]. When discovered, vulnerabilities are tracked under common identifiers known as
CVEs [36]. These vulnerabilities may be hard to detect when
viewing source code, such as in the case of return oriented programming [37, 38] which abuses return statements to execute
assembly instructions in an unexpected order. Trojan Source
attacks could also be considered to belong to this class.

6
6.1

Languages

6.2.1

C

As previously discussed, Figures 3 and 4 depict a commentingout attack in C. We also provide an example of a StretchedString attack in C in Appendix A.1.
In addition to supporting string literals, C supports both
single-line and multi-line comments [39]. Single-line comments begin with the sequence // and are terminated by a
newline character. Multi-line comments begin with the sequence /∗ and are terminated with the sequence ∗ /. Conveniently, multi-line comments can begin and end on a single
line, despite their name. String literals are contained within
double quotes, e.g. " · ". Strings can be compared using the
function strcmp.
C is well-suited for the commenting-out and stretchedstring exploit techniques, but only partially suited for early

Evaluation
Experimental Setup

To validate the feasibility of the attacks described in this
paper, we implemented proof-of-concept attacks on simple
programs in 12 different languages. Each proof of concept is a
program with source code that, when rendered, displays logic
indicating that the program should have no output; however,
the compiled version of each program outputs the text ‘You

3 github.com/nickboucher/trojan-source
4 trojansource.codes

6

Table 2: Trojan Source attack language vulnerability.
Xrepresents fully vulnerable, and ~ represents vulnerable with less common style.5
Language

Vulnerable
Early Return

Commenting-Out

Stretched Strings

Tool Evaluated

C

~

X

X

C++

~

X

X

C#
JavaScript
Java
Rust
Go

~
~
~
~
~

X
X
X
X
X

X
X
X
X
X

Python

X

X

X

SQL
Bash
Assembly
Solidity

X
~
X
X

X
X
X
X

X
X
~
~

6.2.4

returns. This is because when the multiline comment terminator, i.e. */, is reordered using a right-to-left control character,
it becomes /*. This provides a visual clue that something is
not right. This can be overcome by writing reversible comment terminators as /*/, but this is less elegant and still leaves
other visual clues such as the line-terminating semicolon. We
provide an example of a functioning but less elegant earlyreturn attack in C in Appendix A.1 which, although it looks
like it prints ‘Hello World.’, in fact prints nothing.
6.2.2

JavaScript

JavaScript, also known as ECMAScript, is an interpreted language that provides in-browser client-side scripting for web
pages, and is increasingly also used for server-side web application and API implementations [42]. JavaScript is vulnerable
to the same attack paradigms as the preceding languages, and
we present the same proof-of-concept attacks using JavaScript
syntax in Appendix A.7 as well as the previously discussed
Figures 5 and 6.

C++
6.2.5

Since C++ is a linguistic derivative of C, it should be no surprise that the same attack paradigms work against the C++
specification [40]. Similar proofs-of-concept modified to adhere to C++ preferred syntax can be seen in Appendix A.2.
6.2.3

GNU gcc v7.6.0
Apple clang v12.0.5
GNU g++ v7.6.0
Apple clang++ v12.0.5
.NET 5.0 via dotnet-script
Node.js v16.4.1
OpenJDK v16.0.1
rustc v1.53.0
go v1.16.6
Python 3.9.5 via clang
Python 3.7.10 via gcc
SQLite v3.39.4
zsh v5.8.1
x86_64 gas on Apple clang v14.0.0
Solidity v0.8.16

Java

Java is a bytecode-compiled multipurpose language maintained by Oracle [43]. It too is vulnerable to the same attack
paradigms as the preceding languages, and we present the
same proofs-of-concept using Java syntax in Appendix A.3.

C#

C# is an object-oriented language created by Microsoft that
typically runs atop .NET, a cross-platform managed runtime,
and is used heavily in corporate settings [41]. C# is vulnerable
to the same attack paradigms as the preceding languages, and
we present the same proof-of-concept attacks using C# syntax
in our online repository.
To our surprise, we found that C# allows Bidi control characters in identifiers such as variable names. Even more surprisingly, these control characters can be placed arbitrarily
within identifiers without affect. That is, the same variable
can be referenced with or without a Bidi control character and
it will resolve the same.

6.2.6

Rust

Rust is a high-performance language increasingly used in
systems programming [44]. It too is vulnerable to the same
attack paradigms as the preceding languages, and we present
the same proof-of-concept attacks using Rust syntax in Appendix A.4. We note that the commenting-out attack throws
an unused variable warning, but this is trivially avoidable.
Xmeans the rendered code visually matches common style for that language,
while ~ means visual renderings adhere to language syntax but deviate from
common style (e.g. the multiline comment terminator */ is written as /*/).
Code samples in the Appendix provide explicit examples.

5 All languages depicted are vulnerable; for specific attack techniques,

7

Table 3: Evaluation of common code editors and web-based repository front-ends for Trojan-Source-vulnerable rendering.
Vulnerable visualizations at the time of discovery are marked with Xand software patched after disclosure is shaded.
Visual Studio Code

Atom

SublimeText

Notepad++

Eclipse

IntelliJ

Visual Studio

Xcode

vim

emacs

Bidi Attack

X

X

Bidi unactioned

Displays control symbol

Mangled

Displays control char

Mangled

N/A

Mangled

X

Homoglyph Attack

X

X

X

X

Missing Glyph

X

X

N/A

Misrendered

X

Bidi Attack

X

X

Bidi unactioned

N/A

X

Displays control char

X

X

Displays codepoint

Displays underscores

Homoglyph Attack

X

X

X

N/A

X

X

X

X

X

X

Bidi Attack

X

X

Bidi unactioned

N/A

X

Displays control char

N/A

N/A

Displays codepoint

X

Homoglyph Attack

X

X

X

N/A

X

X

N/A

N/A

X

X

GitHub

BitBucket

GitLab

Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Edge: X
Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Edge: X

Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Edge: X
Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Edge: X

Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Edge: X
Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Edge: X

Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Edge: X
Safari: Wrong order
Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Edge: X
Safari: X

Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Edge: X
Safari: Wrong order
Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Edge: X
Safari: X

Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Edge: X
Safari: Wrong order
Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Edge: X
Safari: X

Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Chrome: X
Firefox: X

Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Chrome: X
Firefox: X

Chrome: X
Firefox: X
Chrome: X
Firefox: X

Windows

MacOS

Ubuntu

6.2.7

Go

6.2.12

Solidity is a language used to author smart contracts for the
Etherium blockchain. Of all languages considered, Solidity
is the only one that had partial compiler defenses in place
against Bidi control characters prior to coordinated disclosure.
The solidity compiler throws an error when Bidi override and
embedding control characters are detected in source code;
however, no errors are thrown for Bidi isolate control characters, rendering the defenses ineffective. We demonstrate this
in our online proofs-of-concept repository.

Go is a multipurpose open-source language produced by
Google [45]. Go is vulnerable to the same attack paradigms
as as the preceding languages, and we present the same proofof-concept attacks using Go syntax in Appendix A.6 and our
online repository.
6.2.8

Python

Python is a general-purpose scripting language used heavily
in data science and many other settings [46]. Python supports
multiline comments in the form of docstrings opened and
closed with ''' or """. We have already exploited this fact
in Figures 1 and 2 to craft early-return attacks.
An additional commenting-out proof-of-concept attack
against Python 3 can be found in encoded form in Appendix A.5.
6.2.9

6.3

SQL

Bash

Bash is a common shell script also vulnerable to each attack
technique as demonstrated in our online proofs-of-concept
repository.
6.2.11

Code Viewers

We were curious to see how these attacks were visualized by
the editors and code repository front-ends used in modern
development environments, as many tools have different Unicode implementations. We therefore tested the latest releases
of the Visual Studio Code, Atom, Sublime Text, Notepad++,
Eclipse, IntelliJ, vim, and emacs code editors as of October
2021. We also tested the GitHub, Bitbucket, and GitLab webbased code repository front-end interfaces as the same time.
Each evaluation was repeated across three machines running
Windows 10, MacOS Big Sur, and Ubuntu 20.04. The results
can be found in Table 3, where X represents code that displayed the same as the example visualizations in this paper
prior to coordinated disclosure. Applications that have since
been patched are shaded. Any deviations are described.

SQL is a common query language supporting optionally terminated C-style multiline comments. SQL is vulnerable to
each attack technique as we demonstrate in our online proofsof-concept repository.
6.2.10

Solidity

Assembly

7

Discussion

7.1

Ethics

We followed our department’s ethical guidelines carefully during this research. We did not launch any attacks using Trojan
Source methods against codebases we did not own. Furthermore, we performed responsible disclosure to all companies
and organizations owning products in which we discovered
vulnerabilities. We negotiated a 99-day embargo period fol-

Assembly is a human-readable representation of machine
instructions. Despite being a low-level language, it permits
comments and string literals making it vulnerable to each
attack technique as demonstrated in our online proofs-ofconcept repository.
8

Figure 7: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source invisible character Figure 8: Rendered text of a Trojan Source invisible character
commenting-out attack in Rust.
commenting-out attack in Rust.

7.3

lowing our first disclosure to allow affected products to be
repaired, and we will discuss that process later.

7.2

Syntax Highlighting

Many developers use text editors that, in addition to basic text
editing features, provide syntax highlighting for the languages
in which they are programming. Moreover, many code repository platforms, such as GitHub7 , provide syntax highlighting
through a web browser. Comments are often displayed in
a different color from code, and many of the proofs of concept provided in this paper work by deceiving developers into
thinking that comments are code or vice versa.
We might have hoped that a well-implemented syntaxhighlighting platform would at the very least exhibit unusual
syntax highlighting in the vicinity of Bidi control characters
in code, but our experience at the time of discovery was mixed.
Some attacks provided strange highlighting in a subset of editors, but all syntax highlighting nuances depended on both
the editor and the attack.
Although unexpected coloring of source code may flag the
possibility of an encoding attack to experienced developers,
especially once they are familiar with this work, we expect
that most developers would not even notice unusual highlighting, let alone investigate it thoroughly enough to work out
what was going on. A motivated attacker could experiment
with the visualization of different attacks in the text editors
and code repository front-ends used in targeted organizations
in order to select an attack that has no or minimal visual effect.
Bidi control characters will typically cause a cursor to jump
positions on a line when using arrow keys to click through
tokens, or to highlight a line of text character-by-character.
This is an artifact of the effect of the logical ordering of tokens
on many operating systems and Unicode implementations.
Such behavior, while producing no visible changes in text,
may also be enough to alert some experienced developers.
However, we suspect that this requires more attention than is
given by most developers to reviews of large pieces of code.

Attack Feasibility

Attacks on source code are very attractive and valuable to motivated adversaries, as maliciously inserted backdoors can be
incorporated into signed code that persists in the wild for long
periods of time. Moreover, if backdoors are inserted into open
source software components that are included downstream by
many other applications, the blast radius of such an attack can
be very large. Trojan Source attacks introduce the possibility
of inserting such vulnerabilities into source code invisibly,
thus completely circumventing the current principal control
against them, namely human source code review. There is
a long history of the attempted insertion of backdoors into
critical code bases. One example was the attempted insertion
of a root user escalation-of-privilege backdoor into the Unix
kernel, which was as subtle as changing an == token to an =
token [47]. This attack was detected when experienced developers saw the vulnerability. The techniques described here
allow such attacks to be harder to detect in future.
Recent research in developer security usability has shown
that a significant portion of developers will gladly copy and
paste insecure source code from unofficial online sources such
as Stack Overflow6 [20, 48]. Since Bidi control characters
persist through copy-and-paste functionality, malicious code
snippets with invisible vulnerabilities can be posted online
in the hope that they will end up in production code. The
market for such vulnerabilities is vibrant, with exploits on
major platforms now commanding seven-figure sums [49].
As of the time of discovery, C, C++, C#, JavaScript, Java,
Rust, Go, Python, SQL, Bash, Assembly, and Solidity were all
vulnerable to Trojan Source attacks. They are all still formally
vulnerable at the time of writing as their specifications are unchanged, although some of their compilers or interpreters have
now implemented defenses. More broadly, this class of attacks
is likely applicable to any language with common compilers
that accept Unicode source code. Any entity whose security
relies on the integrity of software supply chains should be
concerned.

7.4

Invisible Character Attacks

When discussing the string-stretching technique, we proposed
that invisible characters or homoglyphs could be used to make
visually-identical strings that are logically different when compared. Another invisible-vulnerability technique with which

6 stackoverflow.com

7 github.com

9

we experimented – largely without success – was the use of
invisible characters in function names.
We theorized that invisible characters included in a function name could define a different function from the function
defined by only the visible characters. This could allow an
attacker to define an adversarial version of a standard function, such as printf in C, that can be invoked by calling
the function with an invisible character in the function name.
Such an adversarial function definition could be discreetly
added to a codebase by defining it in a common open-source
package that is imported into the global namespace of the
target program.
However, we found that all compilers analyzed in this paper
emitted compilation errors when this technique was employed,
with the exception of Apple clang v12.0.5 (which emitted a
warning instead of an error), SQL, and shell scripts on zsh.
Should a compiler not instrument defenses against invisible
characters in function definition names – or indeed in variable
names – this attack may well be feasible. That said, our experimental evidence suggests that this theoretical attack already
has defenses employed against it by most modern compilers,
and thus is unlikely to work in practice.
Following the public disclosure of Trojan Source attacks,
open source contributors suggested another invisible character
attack. In this attack, an adversary uses an invisible character to divide multiline comment terminating sequences. By
doing so, compilers typically won’t close the comment and
the subsequent lines are not executed thus creating a variant
of the Commenting-Out technique. An example of this attack in Rust can be found in Figures 7 and 8. This example
does not print any output because the entire function body is
interpreted as a comment.

7.5

Figure 9: Homoglyph function attack in C++.

in C++. For clarity, we denote the Latin H in blue and the
Cyrillic Н in red. This program outputs the text Goodbye,
World! when compiled using clang++. Although this example program appears harmless, a homoglyph attack could
cause significant damage when applied against a common
function, perhaps via an imported library. For example, suppose a function called hashPassword was replaced with a
similar function that called and returned the same value as
the original function, but only after leaking the pre-hashed
password over the network.
All compilers and interpreters examined in this paper
emitted the text Goodbye, World! with similar proofs of
concept. There were only three exceptions. GNU’s gcc
and its C++ counterpart, g++, both emitted stray token errors. Of particular note is the Rust compiler, which threw
a ‘mixed_script_confusables’ warning while producing the
homoglyph attack binary. The warning text suggested that
the function name with the Cyrillic Н used “mixed script
confusables” and suggested rechecking to ensure usage of the
function was wanted. This is a well-designed defense against
homoglyph attacks, and it shows that this attack had been
seriously considered by at least one compiler team.
This defense, together with the defenses against invisible
character attacks, should serve as a precedent. It is reasonable to expect compilers to also incorporate defenses against
Trojan Source attacks.

Homoglyph Attacks

After we investigated invisible characters, we wondered
whether homoglyphs in function names could be used to
define distinct functions whose names appeared to the human eye to be the same. Then an adversary could write a
function whose name appears the same as a pre-existing function – except that one letter is replaced with a visually similar
character. Indeed, this same technique could be used on code
identifiers of any kind, such as variables and class names, and
may be particularly insidious for homoglyphs that appear like
numbers. This attack likely falls under the heading of CWE
1007 [50].
We were able to successfully implement homoglyph attack
proofs-of-concept in every language discussed in this paper
except Assembly and Solidity; that is, C, C++, C#, JavaScript,
Java, Rust, Go, Python, SQL, and Bash all appear to be vulnerable. In our experiments, we defined two functions that
appeared to have the name sayHello, except that one version
used a Latin H while the other used a Cyrillic Н.
Consider Figure 9, which implements a homoglyph attack

7.6

Defenses

The simplest defense is to ban the use of text directionality control characters both in language specifications and in
compilers implementing these languages.
In most settings, this simple solution may well be sufficient.
If an application wishes to print text that requires Bidi control
characters, developers can generate those characters using escape sequences rather than embedding potentially dangerous
characters into source code.
This simple defense can be improved by adding a small
10

amount of nuance. By banning all directionality-control characters, users with legitimate Bidi control character use cases
in comments are penalized. Therefore, a better defense might
be to ban the use of unterminated Bidi control characters
within string literals and comments. By ensuring that each
control character is terminated – that is, for example, that
every LRI has a matching PDI – it becomes impossible to
distort legitimate source code outside of string literals and
comments.
Trojan Source defenses must be enabled by default on all
compilers that support Unicode input, and turning off the defenses should only be permitted when a dedicated suppression
flag is passed.
While changes to language specifications and compilers are
ideal solutions, there is an immediate need for existing code
bases to be protected against this family of attacks. Moreover,
some languages or compilers may choose not to implement
appropriate defenses. To protect organizations that rely on
them, defenses can be employed in build pipelines, code repositories, and text editors.
Build pipelines, such as those used by software producers
to build and sign production code, can scan for the presence
of Bidi control characters before initiating each build and
break the build if such a character is found in source code.
Alternatively, build pipelines can scan for the more nuanced
set of unterminated Bidi control characters. Such tactics provide an immediate and robust defense for existing software
maintainers.
Code repository systems and text editors can also help
prevent Trojan Source attacks by making them visible to
human reviewers. For example, code repository front-ends,
such as web UIs for viewing committed code, can choose
to represent Bidi control characters as visible tokens, thus
making attacks visible, and by adding a visual warning to the
affected lines of code.
Code editors can employ similar tactics. In fact, some already do; vim, for example, defaults to showing Bidi control
characters as numerical code points rather than applying the
Bidi algorithm. However, many common code editors did not
adopt this behavior at the time of disclosure, including most
GUI editors such as Microsoft’s VS Code and Apple’s Xcode.
Many of the largest compilers, code editors, and repositories adopted these defenses following a coordinated disclosure
process; we will describe more detail, including caveats about
false positives, later in this section.

7.7

tool for exposing issues in code that deviate from standard
form, and performing vulnerability checks here helps to keep
compilers efficient.
Meanwhile, those advocating in favor argue that wellknown vulnerabilities should be mitigated in compilers so that
as much as possible of the ecosystem is inoculated against
the attack. For example, most C compilers including GCC
and clang emit warnings by default for any use of the unsafe
stdio function gets; by the same logic, it is sensible to warn
users of unsafe Bidi characters.
While Trojan Source attacks are strictly speaking a matter
for the language rather than the compiler, we are of the view
that compiler protections are in the best interest of the broader
ecosystem.

7.8

Ecosystem Scanning

We were curious if we could find any examples of Trojan
Source attacks in the wild prior to public disclosure of the
attack vector, and therefore tried to scan as much of the open
source ecosystem as we could for signs of attack.
We assembled a RegEx that identified unterminated Bidi
control characters in comments and strings, and GitHub provided us with the results of this pattern run against all public
commits containing non-markup language source code ingested into GitHub from January through mid October 2021
by internally running a Java-syntax RegEx8 against the relevant backend database. This yielded 7,444 commits of the
over over 1 billion commits scanned, which resolved to 2,096
unique files still present in public repositories as of October
2021.
98.8% of the results were false positives. Examples of
clearly non-malicious encodings included LRE characters
placed at the start of file paths, malformed strings in genuinely right-to-left languages, and Bidi characters placed into
localized format string patterns. We note that these results do
not imply that scanning for unterminated Bidi control characters as a compiler, code viewer, or repository defense is likely
to yield a high false positive rate in practice. We also suspect
that most of these false positives were generated by developer
tooling that incorrectly injects Bidi characters to force a set
text directionality. It is likely that such tools will be updated to
use Unicode-compliant terminated Bidi sequences as Trojan
Source defenses gain widespread adoption [3]. Implementers
of defenses should consider the conditions that cause false
positives with this scanning technique and determine whether
they are permissible in their setting.
However, we did find some evidence of techniques similar to Trojan Source attacks being exploited in 1.2% of the
GitHub RegEx scanning results. In one instance, a static code

Compiler Responsibility

The disclosure and release of Trojan Source attacks has
sparked debate on whether compilers should protect against
this vulnerability pattern.
Those advocating against argue that a compiler’s job is
to compile code, not to protect developers from all possible
vulnerabilities. Linters, the argument follows, are the natural

8 The exact RegEx used is available at github.com/nickboucher/trojansource/blob/main/RegEx/java.regex. We provide a more readable RegEx in
PCRE2 syntax as Appendix Figure 32.

11

analysis tool for smart contracts, Slither [51], contained scanning for right-to-left override characters. The tool provides an
example of why this scan is necessary: it uses an RLO character to swap the display order of two single-character variables
passed as arguments. We also discovered multiple instances
of JavaScript obfuscation that used Bidi characters to assist in
obscuring code. This is not necessarily malicious, but is still
an interesting use of directionality control characters. Frustratingly, we also discovered two instances of recipients of
our embargoed disclosures experimenting with these attack
techniques publicly prior to public release. Finally, our scans
located multiple implementations of exploit generators for
directionality control characters in filename extensions, as
previously referenced [18]. Following public disclosure, we
also discovered a GitHub issue referencing a technique similar to stretched-string attacks in the Go language repository,
though the issue did not lead to a patch [52].
In parallel, contributors to the Rust project scanned all historical submissions to crates.io, Rust’s package manager, and
found no evidence of exploitation within the Rust ecosystem.

7.9

platform across vendors implementing defenses. Thirteen of
our recipients, including CERT/CC, opted in to the VINCE
tool for these shared communications. CERT/CC also added
three additional vendors to the disclosure beyond the nineteen
we had already contacted.
On October 18, 2021, Trojan Source attacks were issued
two CVEs [36]: CVE-2021-42574 for tracking the Bidi attack, and CVE-2021-42694 for tracking the homoglyph attack.
These CVEs were issued by MITRE against the Unicode specification.
On the same day, we sent a PGP-encrypted disclosure to the
distros mailing list [54], which contained representatives
of the security teams of 21 operating systems at that time.
This list coordinates the application of patches across OS
maintainers with a maximum embargo period of 14 days.
We observed multiple patterns throughout the coordinated
disclosure process:
• Novel Vulnerability Patterns Vulnerability disclosures
which do not follow commonly known vulnerability patterns (such as CWEs [55]) are likely to be screened
out by disclosure recipients. We observed a tendency to
close issues immediately as representing no threat when
they did not align to something well-known and easily
demonstrated, such as SQL injection.

Coordinated Disclosure

We contacted nineteen independent companies and organizations in a coordinated disclosure effort to build defenses
for affected compilers, interpreters, code editors, and code
repository front-ends. We set a 99-day embargoed disclosure
period during which disclosure recipients could implement
defenses before we published our attacks. We met a variety
of responses ranging from patching commitments and bug
bounties to quick dismissal and references to legal policies.
We selected an initial set of disclosure recipients by identifying the maintainers of products that our experiments indicated were affected by the Trojan Source vulnerability pattern.
We also included companies that, to our knowledge, maintained their own internal compilers and build tools. The initial
disclosures were sent on July 25, 2021, and additional disclosures were sent as further impact was identified.
Of the nineteen software suppliers with whom we engaged,
seven used an outsourced platform for receiving vulnerability
disclosures, six had dedicated web portals for vulnerability disclosures, four accepted disclosures via PGP-encrypted email,
and two accepted disclosures only via non-PGP email. They
all confirmed receipt of our disclosure, and ultimately nine of
them committed to releasing a patch.
Eleven of the recipients had bug bounty programs offering payment for vulnerability disclosures. Of these, five paid
bounties, with an average payment of $2,246.40 and a range
of $4,475.
On September 9, 2021, we sent a vulnerability report to
CERT/CC, the CERT Coordination Center sponsored by
CISA [53]. Our report was accepted the same day for coordinated disclosure assistance. This gave all affected vendors
access to VINCE, a tool providing a shared communication

• Impactful Language When writing vulnerability disclosures, descriptions that personalize the potential impact can be needed to drive action. Disclosures naming
specific products at risk were most effective.
• CVEs CVEs are useful, as they increase the chance that
the recipient will take the time to read and understand
the report. However, CVEs are by default raised by the
affected supplier, so are not much help during an initial
contact. We eventually had to fall back on the CVE issuer
of last resort, MITRE.
• Shared Communication CERT/CC’s VINCE platform
provides a useful and neutral cross-organization discussion tool during coordinated disclosures. The tool allows
affected vendors to post on a private discussion board,
and makes it much easier to communicate to all affected
parties in a central location. The CERT/CC team will
also help to coordinate contacting affected vendors under
embargo, which provides a helpful method for scaling
out disclosure efforts at no cost. Like CVEs, having a
CERT/CC case also adds to the credibility of disclosures.
• Open Source Assistance Disclosing to open source operating system security teams is helpful for assistance
coordinating patches across the ecosystem, including
with contributors of open source projects that may not
otherwise offer an embargoed disclosure method. In particular, Linux operating systems backed by a commercial
entity have both the funding and incentives to ensure that
12

common open source tools are patched prior to public
disclosure. Maintainers of open source projects commonly work for or closely with these companies, and as
such can be included in security responses.

7.10

compilers. We note that almost all compilers already defend
against one related attack, which involves creating adversarial function names using zero-width space characters, while
three generate errors in response to another, which exploits
homoglyphs in function names.
About half of the compiler maintainers we contacted during
the disclosure period are working on patches or have committed to do so. As the others are dragging their feet, it is
prudent to deploy other controls in the meantime where this
is quick and cheap, or relevant and needful. Three firms that
maintain code repositories are also deploying defenses. We
recommend that governments and firms that rely on critical
software should identify their their suppliers’ posture, exert
pressure on them to implement adequate defenses, and ensure that any gaps are covered by controls elsewhere in their
toolchain.
The fact that the Trojan Source vulnerability affects almost all computer languages makes it a rare opportunity for a
system-wide and ecologically valid cross-platform and crossvendor comparison of responses. As far as we are aware, it is
an unprecedented test of the coordinated disclosure ecosystem.
Scientifically, this research also contributes to the growing
body of work on security usability from the developer’s perspective. It is not sufficient for a compiler to be verified; it
must also be safely usable. Compilers that are trivially vulnerable to adversarial text encoding cannot reasonably be
described as secure.

Industry Response

Multiple code repositories were patched following our disclosures. GitHub now shows a warning banner and code
point visualization for Bidi control characters [56]. Likewise, Bitbucket now visualizes Bidi control characters as code
points [57]. GitLab, too, now visualizes both Bidi control characters and potential homoglyphs [58].
Likewise, some code editors also released patches. Visual
Studio Code now visualizes both Bidi control characters and
potential homoglyphs by default [59]. Emacs now uses a
heuristic to apply visual highlighting to suspected malicious
use of Bidi control characters [60].
Compiler patches were also published in response to the
disclosures. Rust released a new set of lints in the rustc compiler that will throw errors upon detection of non-escaped
Bidi characters [61]. GCC released a new warning detecting
Bidi misuse, -Wbidi-chars, which is enabled by default [62].
LLVM added a set of checks to the official clang-tidy linter,
but did not add compiler warnings for performance considerations [63]. The Java team, on the other hand, declared the
Trojan source attack to be an issue for code editors rather than
for the language.
Finally, a new working group was proposed within Unicode
to address Trojan Source-style attacks in future versions of
the Unicode specification [64].

8

Acknowledgment
We would like to thank GitHub for assisting with scanning
the open source ecosystem, Pietro Albini and Mara Bos of
the Rust project for scanning crates.io, CERT/CC for assistance with coordinated disclosure, GitHub user @securitycurious for suggesting Bidi control characters in identifiers
and RegExs, and Abdun Nihaal for suggesting invisible characters in multiline comments.

Conclusion

We have presented a new type of attack that enables invisible
vulnerabilities to be inserted into source code. Our Trojan
Source attacks use Unicode control characters to modify the
order in which blocks of characters are displayed, thus enabling comments and strings to appear to be code and vice
versa. This enables an attacker to craft code that is interpreted
one way by compilers and a different way by human reviewers. We present proofs of concept for C, C++, C#, JavaScript,
Java, Rust, Go, Python, SQL, Bash, and Assembly and argue
that this attack may well appear in any programming language
that supports internationalized text in comments and string
literals, even in other encoding standards.
As powerful supply-chain attacks can be launched easily
using these techniques, it is essential for organizations that
participate in a software supply chain to implement defenses.
We have discussed countermeasures that can be used at a
variety of levels in the software development toolchain: the
language specification, the compiler, the text editor, the code
repository, and the build pipeline. We are of the view that
the long-term solution to the problem will be deployed in

References
[1] K. Thompson, “Reflections on Trusting Trust,” Commun.
ACM, vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 761–763, 1984. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/358198.358210
[2] S. Peisert, B. Schneier, H. Okhravi, F. Massacci, T. Benzel, C. Landwehr, M. Mannan, J. Mirkovic, A. Prakash, and
J. Michael, “Perspectives on the SolarWinds Incident,” IEEE
Security & Privacy, vol. 19, no. 02, pp. 7–13, Mar 2021.
[3] The Unicode Consortium, “Unicode Bidirectional Algorithm,” The Unicode Consortium, Tech. Rep. Unicode
Technical Report #9, Feb. 2020. [Online]. Available:
https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr9/tr9-42.html
[4] J. Painter and J. McCarthy, “Correctness of a compiler for
arithmetic expressions,” in Proceedings of Symposia in Applied

13

Mathematics, vol. 19. American Mathematical Society, 1967,
pp. 33–41. [Online]. Available: http://jmc.stanford.edu/
articles/mcpain/mcpain.pdf

[19] N. Boucher, I. Shumailov, R. Anderson, and N. Papernot, “Bad
Characters: Imperceptible NLP Attacks,” in 43rd IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy. IEEE, 2022.

[5] M. A. Dave, “Compiler verification: a bibliography,” ACM
SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes, vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 2–2,
2003.

[20] Y. Acar, M. Backes, S. Fahl, D. Kim, M. L. Mazurek, and
C. Stransky, “You Get Where You’re Looking for: The Impact of Information Sources on Code Security,” in 2016 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 2016, pp. 289–305.

[6] D. Patterson and A. Ahmed, “The next 700 compiler correctness theorems (functional pearl),” Proceedings of the ACM on
Programming Languages, vol. 3, no. ICFP, pp. 1–29, 2019.

[21] F. Fischer, K. Böttinger, H. Xiao, C. Stransky, Y. Acar,
M. Backes, and S. Fahl, “Stack Overflow Considered Harmful?
The Impact of Copy&Paste on Android Application Security,”
in 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 2017,
pp. 121–136.

[7] V. D’Silva, M. Payer, and D. Song, “The Correctness-Security
Gap in Compiler Optimization,” in 2015 IEEE Security and
Privacy Workshops, 2015, pp. 73–87.

[22] D. van der Linden, E. Williams, J. Hallett, and A. Rashid, “The
Impact of Surface Features on Choice of (in)Secure Answers
by Stackoverflow Readers,” IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 364–376, 2022.

[8] L. Simon, D. Chisnall, and R. Anderson, “What You Get is
What You C: Controlling Side Effects in Mainstream C Compilers,” in 2018 IEEE European Symposium on Security and
Privacy (EuroS&P), Apr. 2018, pp. 1–15.

[23] G. Simpson, T. Moore, and R. Clayton, “Ten years of attacks
on companies using visual impersonation of domain names,”
in APWG Symposium on Electronic Crime Research (eCrime).
IEEE, 2020.

[9] The Unicode Consortium, “The Unicode Standard, Version 13.0,” Mar. 2020. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode13.0.0
[10] C. J. Alberts, A. J. Dorofee, R. Creel, R. J. Ellison, and
C. Woody, “A Systemic Approach for Assessing Software
Supply-Chain Risk,” in 2011 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2011, pp. 1–8.

[24] B. Sullivan, “PayPal alert! Beware the ’Paypai’ scam,” Jul.
2000. [Online]. Available: https://www.zdnet.com/article/
paypal-alert-beware-the-paypai-scam-5000109103/
[25] The Unicode Consortium, “Unicode Security Considerations,” The Unicode Consortium, Tech. Rep. Unicode
Technical Report #36, Sep. 2014. [Online]. Available:
https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr36/tr36-15.html

[11] A. Nappa, R. Johnson, L. Bilge, J. Caballero, and T. Dumitras,
“The Attack of the Clones: A Study of the Impact of Shared
Code on Vulnerability Patching,” in 2015 IEEE Symposium on
Security and Privacy, 2015, pp. 692–708.

[26] E. Gabrilovich and A. Gontmakher, “The Homograph Attack,”
Commun. ACM, vol. 45, no. 2, p. 128, Feb. 2002. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/503124.503156

[12] J. Biden, “Executive Order on Improving the Nation’s
Cybersecurity,” May 2021, Executive Order 14028.
[Online]. Available: https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefingroom/presidential-actions/2021/05/12/executive-order-onimproving-the-nations-cybersecurity

[27] T. Holgers, D. E. Watson, and S. D. Gribble, “Cutting through
the Confusion: A Measurement Study of Homograph Attacks,”
in Proceedings of the Annual Conference on USENIX ’06 Annual Technical Conference, ser. ATEC ’06. USA: USENIX
Association, 2006, p. 24.

[13] R. J. Ellison and C. Woody, “Supply-Chain Risk Management:
Incorporating Security into Software Development,” in 2010
43rd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
2010, pp. 1–10.

[28] MITRE, “CAPEC-632: Homograph Attack via Homoglyphs
(Version 3.4),” MITRE, Common Attack Pattern Enumeration
and Classification 632, Nov. 2015. [Online]. Available:
https://capec.mitre.org/data/definitions/632.html

[14] E. Levy, “Poisoning the software supply chain,” IEEE Security
Privacy, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 70–73, 2003.

[29] H. Suzuki, D. Chiba, Y. Yoneya, T. Mori, and S. Goto,
“ShamFinder: An Automated Framework for Detecting IDN
Homographs,” in Proceedings of the Internet Measurement
Conference, ser. IMC ’19. New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 2019, p. 449–462. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3355369.3355587

[15] B. A. Sabbagh and S. Kowalski, “A Socio-technical Framework
for Threat Modeling a Software Supply Chain,” IEEE Security
Privacy, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 30–39, 2015.
[16] M. Ohm, H. Plate, A. Sykosch, and M. Meier, “Backstabber’s
Knife Collection: A Review of Open Source Software Supply
Chain Attacks,” in Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and
Vulnerability Assessment, C. Maurice, L. Bilge, G. Stringhini,
and N. Neves, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2020, pp. 23–43.

[30] A. Costello, “Punycode: A Bootstring encoding of Unicode
for Internationalized Domain Names in Applications (IDNA),”
Internet Requests for Comments, RFC 3492, March 2003.
[Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3492

[17] OWASP,
“A9:2017
Using
Components
with
Known
Vulnerabilities,”
2017.
[Online].
Available: https://owasp.org/www-project-top-ten/2017/A9_2017Using_Components_with_Known_Vulnerabilities.html

[31] J. Klensin, “Internationalized Domain Names in Applications
(IDNA): Protocol,” Internet Requests for Comments, RFC
5891, August 2010. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfceditor.org/rfc/rfc5891

[18] Brian Krebs, “‘Right-to-Left Override’ Aids Email Attacks,”
Sep. 2011. [Online]. Available: https://krebsonsecurity.com/
2011/09/right-to-left-override-aids-email-attacks/

[32] Microsoft, “Win32/Sirefef,” Sep. 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/wdsi/threats/malwareencyclopedia-description?Name=Win32/Sirefef

14

[33] J. Lell, “[Hacking-Contest] Invisible configuration file
backdooring with Unicode homoglyphs,” May 2014.
[Online]. Available: https://www.jakoblell.com/blog/2014/05/
07/hacking-contest-invisible-configuration-file-backdooringwith-unicode-homoglyphs/

[48] F. Fischer, K. Böttinger, H. Xiao, C. Stransky, Y. Acar,
M. Backes, and S. Fahl, “Stack Overflow Considered Harmful?
The Impact of Copy & Paste on Android Application Security,”
in 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP), 2017,
pp. 121–136.

[34] D. A. Wheeler, “Initial analysis of underhanded source
code,” Institute for Defense Analyses, Tech. Rep. D13166, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://apps.dtic.mil/sti/pdfs/
AD1122149.pdf

[49] N. Perlroth, This Is How They Tell Me the World Ends: The
Cyberweapons Arms Race. Bloomsbury, 2021.
[50] MITRE, “CWE 1007: Insufficient Visual Distinction of
Homoglyphs Presented to User,” Jul. 2017. [Online].
Available: https://cwe.mitre.org/data/definitions/1007.html

[35] “A Taxonomy of Software Flaws,” May 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.nist.gov/itl/ssd/software-qualitygroup/taxonomy-software-flaws

[51] J. Feist, “Slither – a Solidity static analysis framework,” Oct.
2018. [Online]. Available: https://blog.trailofbits.com/2018/
10/19/slither-a-solidity-static-analysis-framework/

[36] MITRE, “About the CVE Program,” Oct. 2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.cve.org/About/Overview

[52] Golang project contributors, “proposal: spec: disallow ltr/rtl
characters in string literals?” May 2017. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/golang/go/issues/20209

[37] Solar Designer, “Getting around non-executable stack (and
fix),” Aug 1997. [Online]. Available: https://seclists.org/
bugtraq/1997/Aug/63

[53] Carnegie Mellon University Software Engineering Institute,
“CERT Coordination Center.” [Online]. Available: https:
//www.kb.cert.org

[38] R. Roemer, E. Buchanan, H. Shacham, and S. Savage,
“Return-Oriented Programming: Systems, Languages, and
Applications,” ACM Trans. Inf. Syst. Secur., vol. 15,
no. 1, mar 2012. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/
2133375.2133377

[54] Openwall Project, “Operating System Distribution Security
Contact lists,” Sep 2021. [Online]. Available: https://osssecurity.openwall.org/wiki/mailing-lists/distros
[55] MITRE, “CWE Overview,” Oct. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://cwe.mitre.org/about/index.html

[39] ISO, ISO/IEC 9899:2018 Information technology — Programming languages — C, 4th ed. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Organization for Standardization, Jun. 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/standard/74528.html

[56] GitHub, “Warning about bidirectional Unicode text,” Oct.
2021. [Online]. Available: https://github.blog/changelog/202110-31-warning-about-bidirectional-unicode-text

[40] ISO, ISO/IEC 14882:2020 Information technology — Programming languages — C++, 6th ed. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Organization for Standardization, Dec. 2020.
[Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/standard/79358.html

[57] Atlassian, “Multiple Products Security Advisory Unrendered unicode bidirectional override characters
- CVE-2021-42574,” Nov. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://confluence.atlassian.com/security/multiple-productssecurity-advisory-unrendered-unicode-bidirectionaloverride-characters-cve-2021-42574-1086419475.html

[41] ISO, ISO/IEC 23270:2018 Information technology — Programming languages — C#, 3rd ed. Geneva, Switzerland:
International Organization for Standardization, Dec. 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www.iso.org/standard/75178.html

[58] GitLab, “GitLab Security Release: 14.4.1, 14.3.4, and 14.2.6,”
Oct. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://about.gitlab.com/
releases/2021/10/28/security-release-gitlab-14-4-1-released

[42] Ecma, ECMA-262, 12th ed.
Geneva, Switzerland:
Ecma International, Jun. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.ecma-international.org/publications-andstandards/standards/ecma-262

[59] Microsoft, “Visual Studio Code: October 2021 (version 1.62),”
Oct. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://code.visualstudio.com/
updates/v1_62

[43] J. Gosling, B. Joy, G. Steele, G. Bracha, A. Buckley, D. Smith,
and G. Bierman, The Java® Language Specification, 16th ed.
Java Community Press, Feb. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/specs/jls/se16/jls16.pdf

[60] E. Zaretskii, “Better detection of potentially malicious bidi text,” Nov. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://git.savannah.gnu.org/cgit/emacs.git/commit/?id=
b96855310efed13e0db1403759b686b9bc3e7490

[44] The Rust Project Developers, The Rust Reference. The
Rust Foundation, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://doc.rustlang.org/reference

[61] The Rust Security Response WG, “Security advisory for
rustc (CVE-2021-42574),” Nov. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://blog.rust-lang.org/2021/11/01/cve-2021-42574.html

[45] The Go Project Developers, The Go Programming Language
Specification. Google, Feb. 2021. [Online]. Available:
https://golang.org/ref/spec

[62] GNU, “GCC: Warning Options,” Jan. 2022. [Online]. Available: https://gcc.gnu.org/onlinedocs/gcc/WarningOptions.html

[46] The Python Project Developers, The Python Language
Reference, 3rd ed. The Python Software Foundation, 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://docs.python.org/3/reference

[63] LLVM, “New passes in clang-tidy to detect (some)
Trojan Source,” Jan. 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//blog.llvm.org/posts/2022-01-12-trojan-source

[47] J. Corbet, “An attempt to backdoor the kernel,” Linux
Weekly News, Nov. 2003. [Online]. Available: https:
//lwn.net/Articles/57135

[64] M. Davis, R. Leroy, P. Constable, and M. Scherer, “Avoiding
Source Code Spoofing,” Jan. 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.unicode.org/L2/L2022/22007-avoiding-spoof.pdf

15

A

A.1

Appendix

C Trojan Source Proofs-of-Concept

Figure 10: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source stretched-string
attack in C.

Figure 11: Rendered text of a Trojan Source stretched-string
attack in C.

Figure 12: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source early-return attack Figure 13: Rendered text of a Trojan Source early-return attack
in C.
in C.

A.2

C++ Trojan Source Proofs-of-Concept

Figure 14: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source stretched-string
attack in C++.

Figure 15: Rendered text of a Trojan Source stretched-string
attack in C++.

Figure 16: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in C++.

Figure 17: Rendered text of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in C++.

16

A.3

Java Trojan Source Proofs-of-Concept

Figure 18: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source stretched-string
attack in Java.

Figure 19: Rendered text of a Trojan Source stretched-string
attack in Java.

Figure 20: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in Java.

Figure 21: Rendered text of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in Java.

A.4

Rust Trojan Source Proofs-of-Concept

Figure 22: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source stretched-string
attack in Rust.

Figure 23: Rendered text of a Trojan Source stretched-string
attack in Rust.

Figure 24: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in Rust.

Figure 25: Rendered text of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in Rust.

A.5

Python Trojan Source Proof-of-Concept

Figure 26: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in Python.

Figure 27: Rendered text of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in Python.

17

A.6

Go Trojan Source Proof-of-Concept

Figure 28: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in Go.

A.7

Figure 29: Rendered text of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in Go.

JavaScript Trojan Source Proof-of-Concept

Figure 30: Encoded bytes of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in JS.

A.8

Figure 31: Rendered text of a Trojan Source commenting-out
attack in JS.

Trojan Source Regular Expression

(?( DEFINE )
(? < pdi >([^\ x {2067}\ x {2066}\ x {2068}]*)([^\ x {2067}\ x {2066}\ x {2068}\ x {2069}]*)
((? -2)[\ x {2067}\ x {2066}\ x {2068}](? -2)(? -1)*(? -2)[\ x {2069}](? -2))*
(? -3)[\ x {2067}\ x {2066}\ x {2068}]+?(? -2)*)
(? < pdf >([^\ x {202 B }\ x {202 A }\ x {202 E }\ x {202 D }]*)([^\ x {202 B }\ x {202 A }\ x {202 E }\ x {202 D }\ x {202 C }]*)
((? -2)[\ x {202 B }\ x {202 A }\ x {202 E }\ x {202 D }](? -2)(? -1)*(? -2)[\ x {202 C }](? -2))*
(? -3)[\ x {202 B }\ x {202 A }\ x {202 E }\ x {202 D }]+?(? -2)*)
(? < unbal >(?& pdi )|(?& pdf ))(? < string >(?: ’(?& unbal ) ’)|(?:"(?& unbal )"))
(? < comment >(?:\/\*(?& unbal )\*\/)|(?:\/\/(?& unbal )$ )|(?:#(?& unbal )$ ))
)
(?& string )|(?& comment )

Figure 32: Regular Expression in PCRE2 syntax for identifying unbalanced Bidi control characters in comments and strings that
may indicate Trojan Source attacks. Newlines added for formatting purposes.

18

